

![Phys.org](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/logo-

header.png)

Topics

            
                            * Week's top
                * Latest news
                * Unread news
                * Subscribe
            

### Science X Account

__

__

Remember me

Sign In

Click here to sign in with or

Forget Password?

Not a member? **Sign up**

Learn more

            
                            * Nanotechnology
                * Physics
                * Earth
                * Astronomy & Space
                * Technology
                * Chemistry
                * Biology
                * Other Sciences
            
                *         * share this!
            
                * 173
            
                * Twit
            
                * Share
            
                * Email
            
                1. Home
                2. Astronomy & Space
                3. Space Exploration
            
                *         *         * * * *
            

November 21, 2016

# How bad is the radiation on Mars?

by Matt Williams, Universe Today

![How bad is the radiation on

Mars?](https://3c1703fe8d.site.internapcdn.net/newman/csz/news/800/2016/howbadisther.jpg)
Diagram showing the amount of cosmic radiation the surface of Mars is exposed
to. Credit: NASA

Human exploration of Mars has been ramping up in the past few decades. In
addition to the eight active missions on or around the Red Planet, seven more
robotic landers, rovers and orbiters are scheduled to be deployed there by the
end of the decade. And by the 2030s and after, several space agencies are
planning to mount crewed missions to the surface as well.

On top of that, there are even plenty of volunteers who are prepared to make a
one-way journey to Mars, and people advocating that we turn it into a second
home. All of these proposals have focused attention on the peculiar hazards
that come with sending human beings to Mars. Aside from its cold, dry
environment, lack of air, and huge sandstorms, there's also the matter of its
radiation.

**Causes:**

Mars has no protective magnetosphere, as Earth does. Scientists believe that
at one time, Mars also experienced convection currents in its core, creating a
dynamo effect that powered a planetary magnetic field. However, roughly 4.2
billions year ago – either due to a massive impact from a large object, or
rapid cooling in its core – this dynamo effect ceased.

As a result, over the course of the next 500 million years, Mars atmosphere
was slowly stripped away by solar wind. Between the loss of its magnetic field
and its atmosphere, the surface of Mars is exposed to much higher levels of
radiation than Earth. And in addition to regular exposure to cosmic rays and
solar wind, it receives occasional lethal blasts that occur with strong solar
flares.

Credit: Universe Today **Investigations:**

NASA's 2001 Mars Odyssey spacecraft was equipped with a special instrument
called the Martian Radiation Experiment (or MARIE), which was designed to
measure the radiation environment around Mars. Since Mars has such a thin
atmosphere, radiation detected by Mars Odyssey would be roughly the same as on
the surface.

Over the course of about 18 months, the Mars Odyssey probe detected ongoing
radiation levels which are 2.5 times higher than what astronauts experience on
the International Space Station – 22 millirads per day, which works out to
8000 millirads (8 rads) per year. The spacecraft also detected 2 solar proton
events, where radiation levels peaked at about 2,000 millirads in a day, and a
few other events that got up to about 100 millirads.

For comparison, human beings in developed nations are exposed to (on average)
0.62 rads per year. And while studies have shown that the human body can
withstand a dose of up to 200 rads without permanent damage, prolonged
exposure to the kinds of levels detected on Mars could lead to all kinds of
health problems – like acute radiation sickness, increased risk of cancer,
genetic damage, and even death.

And given that exposure to any amount of radiation carries with it some degree
of risk, NASA and other space agencies maintain a strict policy of ALARA (As-
Low-As-Reasonable-Achievable) when planning missions.

![How bad is the radiation on

Mars?](https://3c1703fe8d.site.internapcdn.net/newman/csz/news/800/2016/1-howbadisther.jpg)
Artist impression of a Mars settlement with cutaway view. Credit: NASA Ames
Research Center

**Possible Solutions:**

Human explorers to Mars will definitely need to deal with the increased
radiation levels on the surface. What's more, any attempts to colonize the Red
Planet will also require measures to ensure that exposure to radiation is
minimized. Already, several solutions – both short term and long- have been
proposed to address this problem.

For example, NASA maintains multiple satellites that study the sun, the space
environment throughout the solar system, and monitor for galactic cosmic rays
(GCRs), in the hopes of gaining a better understanding of solar and cosmic
radiation. They've also been looking for ways to develop better shielding for
astronauts and electronics.

In 2014, NASA launched the Reducing Galactic Cosmic Rays Challenge, an
incentive-based competition that awarded a total of $12,000 to ideas on how to
reduce astronauts' exposure to galactic cosmic rays. After the initial
challenge in April of 2014, a follow-up challenge took place in July that
awarded a prize of $30,000 for ideas involving active and passive protection.

When it comes to long-term stays and colonization, several more ideas have
been floated in the past. For instance, as Robert Zubrin and David Baker
explained in their proposal for a low-cast "Mars Direct" mission, habitats
built directly into the ground would be naturally shielded against radiation.
Zubrin expanded on this in his 1996 book The Case for Mars: The Plan to Settle
the Red Planet and Why We Must.

Proposals have also been made to build habitats above-ground using inflatable
modules encased in ceramics created using Martian soil. Similar to what has
been proposed by both NASA and the ESA for a settlement on the Moon, this plan
would rely heavily on robots using 3-D printing technique known as
"sintering", where sand is turned into a molten material using x-rays.

Credit: Universe Today

MarsOne, the non-profit organization dedicated to colonizing Mars in the
coming decades, also has proposals for how to shield Martian settlers.
Addressing the issue of radiation, the organization has proposed building
shielding into the mission's spacecraft, transit vehicle, and habitation
module. In the event of a solar flare, where this protection is insufficient,
they advocate creating a dedicated radiation shelter (located in a hollow
water tank) inside their Mars Transit Habitat.

But perhaps the most radical proposal for reducing Mars' exposure to harmful
radiation involves jump-starting the planet's core to restore its
magnetosphere. To do this, we would need to liquefy the planet's outer core so
that it can convect around the inner core once again. The planet's own
rotation would begin to create a dynamo effect, and a magnetic field would be
generated.

According to Sam Factor, a graduate student with the Department of Astronomy
at the University of Texas, there are two ways to do this. The first would be
to detonate a series of thermonuclear warheads near the planet's core, while
the second involves running an electric current through the planet, producing
resistance at the core which would heat it up.

In addition, a 2008 study conducted by researchers from the National Institute
for Fusion Science (NIFS) in Japan addressed the possibility of creating an
artificial magnetic field around Earth. After considering continuous
measurements that indicated a 10% drop in intensity in the past 150 years,
they went on to advocate how a series of planet-encircling superconducting
rings could compensate for future losses.

With some adjustments, such a system could be adapted for Mars, creating an
artificial magnetic field that could help shield the surface from some of the
harmful radiation it regularly receives. In the event that terraformers
attempt to create an atmosphere for Mars, this system could also ensure that
it is protected from solar wind.

Lastly, a study in 2007 by researchers from the Institute for Mineralogy and
Petrology in Switzerland and the Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences at Vrije
University in Amsterdam managed to replicate what Mars' core looks like. Using
a diamond chamber, the team was able to replicate pressure conditions on iron-
sulfur and iron-nickel-sulfur systems that correspond to the center of Mars.

![How bad is the radiation on

Mars?](https://3c1703fe8d.site.internapcdn.net/newman/csz/news/800/2016/2-howbadisther.jpg)
Approximate true-color rendering of the central part of the “Columbia Hills”,
taken by NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover Spirit panoramic camera. Credit:
NASA/JPL

What they found was that at the temperatures expected in the Martian core
(~1500 K, or 1227 °C; 2240 °F), the inner core would be liquid, but some
solidification would occur in the outer core. This is quite different from
Earth's core, where the solidification of the inner core releases heat that
keeps the outer core molten, thus creating the dynamo effect that powers our
magnetic field.

The absence of a solid inner core on Mars would mean that the once-liquid
outer core must have had a different energy source. Naturally, that heat
source has since failed, causing the outer core to solidify, thus arresting
any dynamo effect. However, their research also showed that planetary cooling
could lead to core solidification in the future, either due to iron-rich
solids sinking towards the center or iron-sulfides crystallizing in the core.

In other words, Mars' core might become solid someday, which would heat the
outer core and turn it molten. Combined with the planet's own rotation, this
would generate the dynamo effect that would once again fire up the planet's
magnetic field. If this is true, then colonizing Mars and living there safely
could be a simple matter of waiting for the core to crystallize.

There's no way around it. At present, the radiation on the surface of Mars is
pretty hazardous! Therefore, any crewed missions to the planet in the future
will need to take into account radiation shielding and counter-measures. And
any long-term stays there – at least for the foreseeable future – are going to
have to be built into the ground, or hardened against solar and cosmic rays.

But you know what they say about necessity being the mother of invention,
right? And with such luminaries as Stephen Hawking saying that we need to
start colonizing other worlds in order to survive as a species, and people
like Elon Musk and Bas Lansdrop looking to make it happen, we're sure to see
some very inventive solutions in the coming generations!

* * *

Explore further

Mars' ionosphere shaped by crustal magnetic fields

* * *

Source: Universe Today

**Citation** : How bad is the radiation on Mars? (2016, November 21) retrieved
6 June 2019 from https://phys.org/news/2016-11-bad-mars.html

This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the
purpose of private study or research, no part may be reproduced without the
written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only.

181 shares

            
                            * Facebook
            
                * Twitter
            
                * Email
            

Feedback to editors

            
                            * Featured
                * Last Comments
                * Popular
            

#### Polarization-encryption based data storage in 3-D Janus plasmonic helical

nanoapertures

12 hours ago

0

#### Researchers find a way to produce free-standing films of perovskite

oxides

12 hours ago

0

#### Student gives possible explanation for female mating preferences that

decrease male survival chances

13 hours ago

0

#### Study shows penguins attract seabirds when they corral fish

Jun 05, 2019

0

#### Researchers discover bacterial diversity in Justinianic Plague

Jun 05, 2019

0

* * *

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Could climate change make Siberia habitable for humans?

2 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Planck finds no new evidence for cosmic anomalies

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Under the surface: Understanding the (ultra-small) structure of silicon

nanocrystals

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Study confirms banded iron formations originated from oxidized iron

5 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Google's challenge to game consoles to kick off in November

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### The deep learning dive: how cells regulate division

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Argentine fossils take oak and beech family history far into Southern

Hemisphere

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Unusual Japanese plant inspires recalculation of equation used to model

leaf arrangement patterns

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Is sex primarily a strategy against transmissible cancer?

7 hours ago

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Decoding Beethoven's music style using data science

7 hours ago

* * *

### Relevant PhysicsForums posts

#### Milky Way is "in the top percentile of all the galaxies that exist"

4 hours ago

#### Dwarf Planet or Stellar Moon?

4 hours ago

#### Most-detailed-ever simulations of a BH solve long standing mystery

5 hours ago

#### Questions about bayronic acoustic oscillations

10 hours ago

#### Black holes and the first law of thermodynamics

Jun 05, 2019

#### Galaxy Database with distances from Earth

Jun 04, 2019

More from Astronomy and Astrophysics

* * *

##

            
                            * ## Related Stories
            

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Mars' ionosphere shaped by crustal magnetic fields

Nov 07, 2016

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### NASA awards launch services contract for Mars 2020 rover mission

Aug 26, 2016

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Coronal mass ejections at Mars

Sep 24, 2014

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Next solar maximum may be safest time for manned missions to Mars

Feb 10, 2015

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### NASA picks another Mars flight to explore its core (Update)

Aug 20, 2012

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### First Orion flight will assess radiation risk as NASA thinks about human

Mars missions

Nov 21, 2014

            
                            * ## Recommended for you
            

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### InSight's team tries new strategy to help the 'mole'

Jun 05, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Solving the sun's super-heating mystery with Parker Solar Probe

Jun 04, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### VLT observes a passing double asteroid hurtling by Earth at 70 000 km/h

Jun 03, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### Mars on Earth: What's next?

Jun 03, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### NASA plans to send equipment to Moon from 2020

May 31, 2019

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs=)

##### SpaceX says 60 Starlink satellites will grow harder to see

May 31, 2019

## User comments

**TogetherinParis**

Nov 21, 2016

Before we go set off nuclear explosions deep inside the planet Mars, why don't
we solve the hurricane problem we have here on Earth? That way insurance rates
will drop and we'll all be better off enough to afford the Martian holiday?
Stop Hurricanes on Indigogo.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Broadlands**

Nov 21, 2016

Solving hurricanes is not possible anyhow. We cannot even lower CO2 by one
part per million. More rovers back to Mars? What for? No evidence of life now
or billions of years ago... nor even of liquid water. Nothing but oxidized
iron and UV radiation? What will they do there? More pretty pictures?

0

Report Block

* * *

**danR**

Nov 21, 2016

The future, if at all, of 'colonization' is in AI and robots, not humans.

0

Report Block

* * *

**danR**

Nov 21, 2016

> More pretty pictures?

The dream of exploration and colonization is rooted in the forties and fifties
SF illustrations and of famed space artist Chesley Bonestell. Failing
fantastical terraforming plans, people will indeed live most of their lives as
moles underground on Mars, and their children will know no other 'life'.

Ain't gonna happen, except by intelligent machines, who as likely as not may
not even care.

0

Report Block

* * *

**iversenj**

Nov 21, 2016

OK you want to liquify the outter crust, you want to build a planet we can
live on without shields or being stuck in a shelter all day everyday for the
rest of your life. Then you'll love the plan that worked here on Earth. The
same one that lead to the conditions that existed on Earth for life to be
here... How do we do it? Well I am glad you asked. Bombardment. Asteroids
anything that we need on Mars we can extract from the asteroid belt and pummel
the surface of Mars.... And once we have all the resources we need there. Once
you are ready to liquify add Phobos. Phobos is in a declining orbit and will
eventually impact Mars.... Why spend billions or trillions of dollars building
something that will not last and make people live in a prison on a cold shell
of a planet? Phobos is begging for a push... I know the impact will cause
stuff to fly back to Earth and could be a danger. What you call danger I call
the "Sample Return Mission"

0

Report Block

* * *

**Broadlands**

Nov 21, 2016

So.. Dan, except for the dream of exploration and the natural human desire to
explore, why are we doing all this? For our curiosity? What's the name of that
Mars rover again? Pretty expensive stuff just to see what's out there...and
now do it again? Isn't that one definition of insanity? Are they expecting a
different result?

0

Report Block

* * *

**jonesdave**

Nov 21, 2016

@Broadlands,

> No evidence... nor even of liquid water.

Only according to you. Not according to the actual scientists studying the
data. As for life, current or past, we've not even looked for it seriously!

0

Report Block

* * *

**antialias_physorg**

Nov 21, 2016

> habitats built directly into the ground would be naturally shielded against
radiation.

Other than radiation any kind of habitat on Mars will face the danger of
(micro-) meteorites. Mars' atmosphere is very thin. This means that a lot more
meteorites will penetrate to the surface than, say, on Earth. On Earth, if
your house gets hit by a micro meteorite, the likelyhood is that nothing much
happens. Even if it penetrates the chance of anyone being injured is low. But
on Mars we're talking pressurized habitats. Any penetrating object
automatically means a major leak of a very precious resource. Going
underground is the only real protection against this.

Then there's the elephant in the room: gravity.  
How humans react to prolonged exposure to low gravity (other than osteoporosis
and muscular atrophy) - especially during foetal and early childhood phases -
remains to be seen. That could be a knock-out criterium for any kind of
serious colonization from the get-go.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Broadlands**

Nov 21, 2016

Iversenj... On Earth, the origin and evolution of life to the point where
visible light requiring photosynthesis could add oxygen also required a UV
screen. A minimal ozone screen was provided by stratospheric photodissociation
of water and loss of hydrogen to space. That doesn't seem possible for
Mars...or does it?

0

Report Block

* * *

**jonesdave**

Nov 21, 2016

> So.. Dan, except for the dream of exploration and the natural human desire
to explore, why are we doing all this? For our curiosity? What's the name of
that Mars rover again? Pretty expensive stuff just to see what's out
there...and now do it again? Isn't that one definition of insanity? Are they
expecting a different result?

How much does an ICBM cost? How many needed to sterilise Earth? How many have
we built? Space exploration is a tiny fraction of what the military get. Aim
your barbs there, why not?

0

Report Block

* * *

**antialias_physorg**

Nov 21, 2016

> why are we doing all this?

Earth (or the solar system for that matter) is not immune to cosmic accidents.
A single large-ish asteroid could, currently, wipe out humanity. A single
gamma ray burst from a nearby star could sterilize any number of colonies
within the solar system. If we think humanity should have a chance to survive
indefinitely then going into nearby space (and beyond) is a must.  
I find it sort of crazy that we continually ignore the universe out there and
hold only stuff that is roughly 2 meters above the Earth's surface as relevant
for us.

It's all a matter of perspective. If you think only you and what happens in
your lifetime is of value then space exploration makes no sense. If you think
there are things beyond yourself that matter (like your kids, descendants, or
just humanity as a whole) then it's a no-brainer that we should spread at the
earliest opportunity.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Nov 21, 2016

So when civilization collapses here on earth from any number of causes who is
going to build and launch and pilot the machines?

"Colonizing Mars has long been a passion of Musk's. Indeed, the entrepreneur
has repeatedly said that he founded SpaceX in 2002 primarily to help make
humanity a multiplanet species. Having a self-sustaining outpost on the Red
Planet would serve as an insurance policy, making humanity's extinction
unlikely even if something goes terribly awry here on Earth, Musk said
Tuesday."

-This is obvious. 

Self-sustaining means having the ability to independently produce a certain
level of tech to maintain a presence in space. This means rare earths, clean
rooms, robotics, computers, metallurgy etc.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Broadlands**

Nov 21, 2016

Jonesdave... Apparently you haven't been keeping up with the rovers? No
evidence of organic carbon at levels detectable at parts per billion. No
evidence of liquid water other than a few evaporites, layers of sediments with
sandstones, even conglomerates, but no carbonates nor shales. All the way back
for billions of years. Pretty serious look to find nothing.

0

Report Block

* * *

**jonesdave**

Nov 21, 2016

> It's all a matter of perspective. If you think only you and what happens in
your lifetime is of value then space exploration makes no sense. If you think
there are things beyond yourself that matter (like your kids, descendants, or
just humanity as a whole) then it's a no-brainer that we should spread at the
earliest opportunity.

And then there is the question of what would any government do with the money
it takes from space exploration? Give it over to research into clean energy,
alternative fuels? Hand it over to poorer countries in the form of aid?  
Will they buggery. It'll be a bribe, via tax cuts for the already well off, to
make sure they vote for the same idiots next time. Far better spent where it
is.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Broadlands**

Nov 21, 2016

And then there is the question of what would any government do with the money
it takes from space exploration?

Infrastructure! The place is falling apart. We have very smart folks at JPL
who could help with efficient plans to repair and improve what is needed here.
Then wander off to space.

0

Report Block

* * *

**iversenj**

Nov 21, 2016

So hard to solve all the Mars issues in a comment box lol. Here goes... The
Asteroid belt solves some and lessens other problems. The asteroid belt has 2
sections the inner belt and the outter belt. The inner belt is mainly rock.
The outter belt is mainly water ice. By using "robots" we can re-redirect the
asteroids towards mars, adding mass and the impacts will add heat and thicken
the atmosphere. That should vaporize any water on or near the surface and send
into the atmosphere. Phobos, crashing that into Mars will create MAJOR heat
and unlock more water. Once we liquify the surface into molten rock with
phobos we add "Asteroid Psyche" followed by the water asteroids... More mass
more water...

0

Report Block

* * *

**jonesdave**

Nov 21, 2016

> Apparently you haven't been keeping up with the rovers? No evidence of
organic carbon at levels detectable at parts per billion. No evidence of
liquid water other than a few evaporites, layers of sediments with sandstones,
even conglomerates, but no carbonates nor shales. All the way back for
billions of years. Pretty serious look to find nothing.

As far as life goes, they are looking on the surface, with instruments not
specifically designed to search for life signatures. Any current life would
almost certainly be subsurface. Any evidence of past life would be very hard
to detect, and would possibly need a drill.  
As for no evidence that water was on the surface in the past, sorry, but that
is just wrong.  
To link all the relevant papers would take me over the word limit for this and
a few subsequent posts.  
http://www.space....wet.html  
http://science.sc...6231/218  
Not to mention features obviously carved by water.

0

Report Block

* * *

**jonesdave**

Nov 21, 2016

> And then there is the question of what would any government do with the
money it takes from space exploration?

>

> Infrastructure! The place is falling apart. We have very smart folks at JPL
who could help with efficient plans to repair and improve what is needed here.
Then wander off to space.

Really? And how many of those people will still have a job when the funding is
cut?  
Repair and improve what, exactly? Why would JPL need to do that? Isn't that
what politicians are for?  
Keep voting for idiots, and this is going to take more than JPL (whose job it
isn't) to fix.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Nov 21, 2016

> So hard to solve all the Mars issues in a comment box lol. Here goes... The
Asteroid belt solves some and lessens other problems. The asteroid belt has 2
sections the inner belt and the outter belt. The inner belt is mainly rock.
The outter belt is mainly water ice. By using "robots" we can re-redirect the
asteroids towards mars, adding mass and the impacts will add heat and thicken
the atmosphere. That should vaporize any water on or near the surface and send
into the atmosphere. Phobos, crashing that into Mars will create MAJOR heat
and unlock more water. Once we liquify the surface into molten rock with
phobos we add "Asteroid Psyche" followed by the water asteroids... More mass
more water...

Uh thats going to disrupt colony life considerably dont you think? Why dont
you screw up venus instead? Its already hot.

0

Report Block

* * *

**iversenj**

Nov 21, 2016

Sorry Ghost I wanted to do this before we colonize I had commented above that
we should not colonize yet... It makes sense to me to make it a little more
bearable before creating the colony... Plus Phobos is going to crash into Mars
eventually, I wanted to get that part out of the way first. Phobos doesn't
care about our plans...

0

Report Block

* * *

**Harry-TheBeach**

Nov 21, 2016

We will be on Mars. The only questions are when and how. Every problem with
respect to going there and living there can be solved, except for gravity. No
one really has any idea about the impact of 38% gravity on humans, especially
on the growth of babies into adults. It's conceivable that people will very
healthy without all of that wear and tear on their bodies. It's also possible
that eyesight, bone density, and immune system problems will make Mars
uninhabitable unless we do plenty of genetic modifications. Will Martians be a
different species then?

I have written a novel to cover some of these questions and a series of
articles to stimulate discussion of all of them, "Thinking about Mars," that
appears on LinkedIn.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Harry-TheBeach**

Nov 21, 2016

> The future, if at all, of 'colonization' is in AI and robots, not humans.

This may be true for the short term, but not in the long run. Unless gravity
turns out to be a serious impediment, people will live on Mars someday.

0

Report Block

* * *

**danR**

Nov 21, 2016

> So.. Dan, except for the dream of exploration and the natural human desire
to explore, why are we doing all this?

Actually, we aren't. And that's where it's going to stay. By the time we
realistically are able to get to Mars in an actual on-surface exploration
mode, the dream will have ended as we pass the baton from carbon to silicon.
The future is in machines, in the unlikely event they will be curious. I'm not
one to impose anthropomorphic motives on their 'psyches'.

0

Report Block

* * *

**danR**

Nov 21, 2016

> > The future, if at all, of 'colonization' is in AI and robots, not humans.

>

> This may be true for the short term, but not in the long run. Unless gravity
turns out to be a serious impediment, people will live on Mars someday.

You've got it backwards. People won't matter anymore in the long run. We will
join the other primates in obsolescent eco-islands, scratching out an
existence and dreaming of the past...

0

Report Block

* * *

**BackBurner**

Nov 21, 2016

If humans were actually going to Mars in 2030, construction of the transfer
ship would need to begin in the next two years. There's been no published
plans to do that, so we may safely conclude there isn't going to be a crewed
expedition to Mars in that time frame. If we assume "sometime in the 2030's",
construction might begin as late as 2028, under the assumption the task is as
complicated as building the ISS, which took 12 years.

Colonizing Mars using any of the technologies proposed so far by either NASA
or SpaceX simply can't happen; they're ridiculously naive. Musk's fantasy of
launching 100 colonists from the ground directly to Mars (including a "pizza
bar"), then returning the entire circus to Earth, is flat out absurd.

No one is even remotely serious about colonizing Mars at the moment.

0

Report Block

* * *

**bobbysius**

Nov 21, 2016

If we warm Mars a few degrees via orbiting mirrors, SF6 rockets, albedo
reduction, ect., its CO2 inventory will sublimate to give Mars an atmosphere
between 30-60kPa. This denser atmosphere alone would reduce surface radiation
5 to10-fold, which negates any real need for creating a magnetosphere (which
is insanely difficult by comparison). True, any surface water will
photodissociate and the hydrogen would be lost to solar wind, but we're
talking about geologic timescales for that to happen.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Broadlands**

Nov 21, 2016

Hi Jones... "Really? And how many of those people will still have a job when
the funding is cut?  
Repair and improve what, exactly? Why would JPL need to do that? "

You missed the point? Everyone agrees that our roads, bridges, dams, tunnels,
harbors etc. are in need of repair or replacement. JPL, of course, does not do
infrastructure, nor jet propulsion. But, if their expertise were carefully re-
directed from an essentially finished Mars rover "look for life" program they
could help where help is really needed and many job could even be added. If
the entire program were to be scrapped the whole place would dry up. Like most
government programs they tend to have a life of there own. There is little
that is more permanent than a temporary government program. This is one of
them. It may be fun to explore the Universe but we need help here at home.
And, we are running out of money. See you later...but think about it.

0

Report Block

* * *

**BackBurner**

Nov 21, 2016

(cont.)

Nor should they be. The authors point out the problems with making Mars
habitable by humans. Assuming gravity isn't a show stopper, "terraforming"
Mars will be an operation that will preclude colonization before it happens.
Even the least invasive plan for building a magnetosphere would take decades
(the orbital shield mentioned). Asteroid bombardment to build an atmosphere
and "just add water" would also not be things to be done while a colony was on
Mars.

If we think about the tech and effort needed to terraform Mars, then compare
that to the technology and effort needed to build a O'Neil style colony at a
Lagrange point, I think the O'Neal colony makes a whole lot more sense and
serves a better purpose as a staging platform for asteroid and lunar mining.
Luna has the best gravity well, much better than Mars. Why bother boosting
resources from Mars?

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Nov 21, 2016

> Sorry Ghost I wanted to do this before we colonize I had commented above
that we should not colonize yet... It makes sense to me to make it a little
more bearable before creating the colony... Plus Phobos is going to crash into
Mars eventually, I wanted to get that part out of the way first. Phobos
doesn't care about our plans

Your terraforming ultraviolence will take 100 years. We'll be extinct by then.

Plus its totally unnecessary. People spend most of their time in shopping
malls and office buildings as it is. Underground on mars will be no different,
like living in el paso.

And new tech like skinsuits and genetic adaptation will allow more freedom to
walk in the sun amongst the engineered lichen forests.

Like musk and hawking and many others will tell you, this is an EMERGENCY. We
dont have time to waste.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Nov 21, 2016

I meant 1000 years. Terraforming of any kind will take 1000 years.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Jonseer**

Nov 21, 2016

> You missed the point? Everyone agrees that our roads, bridges, dams,
tunnels, harbors etc. are in need of repair or replacement. if their expertise
were carefully re-directed from an essentially finished Mars rover "look for
life" program they could help where help is really needed and many job could
even be added.Like most government programs they tend to have a life of there
own. There is little that is more permanent than a temporary government
program. This is one of them. It may be fun to explore the Universe but we
need help here at home. And, we are running out of money.

How ironic, you decry government inefficiency, Yet your solution is an even
worse version of the same based on the assumption that one engineer/researcher
is good as/the same as any other. Are you the guy who once shouted from the
crowd, keep gubment's hands off my medicare. LOL

0

Report Block

* * *

**jonesdave**

Nov 21, 2016

> You missed the point? Everyone agrees that our roads, bridges, dams,
tunnels, harbors etc. are in need of repair or replacement. JPL, of course,
does not do infrastructure, nor jet propulsion. But, if their expertise were
carefully re-directed from an essentially finished Mars rover "look for life"
program they could help where help is really needed and many job could even be
added. If the entire program were to be scrapped the whole place would dry up.
Like most government programs they tend to have a life of there own. There is
little that is more permanent than a temporary government program. This is one
of them. It may be fun to explore the Universe but we need help here at home.
And, we are running out of money. See you later...but think about it.

Cut 10% of military spending, put the grunts to work doing whatever it is that
is causing where you live to be such a hellhole. Stop giving tax cuts to the
rich. Stop voting for idiots who promise such things. Etc, etc.

0

Report Block

* * *

**jonesdave**

Nov 21, 2016

@Broadlands,  
I'll give you one more reason why we'll continue exploring Mars. Not a good
reason, but a reason all the same; if the U.S. and/or Europe don't do it,
their governments know damn well that the Chinese eventually will. Just like
the U.S. didn't want the U.S.S.R. being the first to land on the Moon. Moronic
reasons, but fitting of politicians.  
And you can bet your life that if the Chinese get a man there first, the
electorate will be demanding to know why 'we' weren't first! "How could we let
the goddamn Chinese get there first? Disgrace."

0

Report Block

* * *

**Broadlands**

Nov 21, 2016

Hi Jones. Yes.. not a good reason. Wake up to reality? There is a limit to
what even you can pay for us to wander around in the Universe essentially for
kicks? And, you are right that engineers are not the same. Neither were those
who were in jet propulsion... but it worked. You are certainly not alone in
thinking that money grows on trees to pay for everything... and if it doesn't
it can be "stolen" from those who have been greedily using it for their family
or its future.

Have a nice holiday. Seriously. Again .. think about it as if it was your
money.

0

Report Block

* * *

**jonesdave**

Nov 21, 2016

> Have a nice holiday. Seriously. Again .. think about it as if it was your
money.

You mean as if $597bn dollars of my money was being spent on defence? And
~$19bn on NASA? I know precisely who I'd be telling to take a cut. How many
people in the US army? When do you reckon the next time will be that the US
puts boots on the ground anywhere (assuming Canada doesn't invade)? First one
home in a body bag, and the politicians shit themselves. Waste of manpower.
Get them to fix your potholes, bridges, whatever.  
Leave NASA to pursue knowledge, unless you'd prefer we'd have stayed in the
dark ages, because nobody has the time nor money to waste on such esoteric
things as maths and geometry, and building telescopes, etc.  
It's a small town, small minded attitude.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Protoplasmix**

Nov 21, 2016

The superconducting rings should work fine, Ghost makes a good point re:
Hawking, et al. Why waste time nuking the place or dropping asteroids on it?
The machine that builds a giant redwood tree fits in the space of just a seed,
and a well-stocked microbiome, hammered out in the experiential trial-and-
error of millions of years and then refined with science, works wonders in
short order – a geometric progression of self-sustaining, self-reproducing
decomposers and composers. Need more water? Beam it down, Scottie, in a river
of ions from the outer belt using the same superconducting technologies. If it
takes longer than 100 years to transform Mars into a habitable planet then
we're slacking.

> Terraforming of any kind will take 1000 years.

Slacker.

0

Report Block

* * *

**antialias_physorg**

Nov 22, 2016

> Get them to fix your potholes, bridges, whatever.

Exactly. Soldiers are also much better at manual labor than NASA techs and
scientists. It'd be a total waste of their skills if they were to be
redirected into fixing infrastructure.

Then there's the payoff from NASA. Depending on where you look you will find a
return on investment (ROI) of 10-14 dollars for every dollar spent. It's hard
to find any other enterprise that gives you that (certainly no government
funded one)

For comparison: If the military budget had a similar ROI the US would be debt
free in 3 years. Think about that for a minute. And then consider what you
would like to invest (your taxpayer money) in. Because the investment is
directly benefitting you.

A good ROI from your (taxpayer money) investment (e.g. by investing in NASA)
means more taxes from elsewhere (businesses) which means you can get a tax cut
in the future.  
A bad ROI (like military spending) means more taxes for you in the future.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Nov 22, 2016

> > Terraforming of any kind will take 1000 years

>

> Slacker

And no need for ion firehoses as there is an ocean of water on mars. But keep
in mind that liberating it will flood much valuable real estate.

"Max Skinner:  
What is it, Major Lawrence, that attracts you, personally, to the desert?...
Its clean. I like it because its clean."

0

Report Block

* * *

**iversenj**

Nov 22, 2016

"Your terraforming ultraviolence will take 100(0) years"

I do like the term however i feel like it's more ultra-organic or ultra-
natural. Bombarment solves a lot of issues, actually most if not all of
them... It worked for Earth, why re-invent the wheel?

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Nov 22, 2016

> "Your terraforming ultraviolence will take 100(0) years"

>

> I do like the term however i feel like it's more ultra-organic or ultra-
natural. Bombarment solves a lot of issues, actually most if not all of
them... It worked for Earth, why re-invent the wheel?

Because it took a billion years here.

We're out of time.

And we already spend most all of our time indoors. Want a park? Make some big
bubbles and grow grass.  
https://en.wikipe...ct_Gnome

-Picture one of these with condos cut into the walls. Radiation? Is ok martians will need the radioisotopes. No problemo after 6 months. Connect them up with nuclear earth borers. Instant Hyperloops and levittowns. 

Billions of people can (will) be living quite happily beneath the surface of
mars.

0

Report Block

* * *

**iversenj**

Nov 22, 2016

Ghost it did take a billion years true. We can speed that up. I don't think we
are out of time though. I would like to take the extra time and do it right.
Certainly we would not see the results but I would be happy knowing that
instead of just tremendous debt, we would leave something of value for future
generations.

I noticed you said 2 times we are out of time, is it just you and I that are
out of time or everyone?

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Nov 22, 2016

"Stephen Hawking called for a massive investment in establishing colonies on
the Moon and Mars in a lecture in honour of NASA's 50th anniversary. He argued
that the world should devote about 10 times as much as NASA's current budget –
or 0.25% of the world's financial resources – to space.

"The renowned University of Cambridge physicist has previously spoken in
favour of colonising space as an insurance policy against the possibility of
humanity being wiped out by catastrophes like nuclear war and climate change."

I gave you the musk quote. The original 'eggs in 1 basket' quote was from
heinlein. Here's a whole list  
http://www.spacequotes.com

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Nov 22, 2016

And I'm not giving you my opinion I'm telling you what's going to happen.

"Musk thinks it's possible to begin shuttling thousands of people between
Earth and our smaller, redder neighbor sometime within the next decade or so.
And not too long after that—perhaps 40 or a hundred years later, Mars could be
home to a self-sustaining colony of a million people."

Mars will begin filling up just as fast as the new world did in the 1500s.

0

Report Block

* * *

**Captain Stumpy**

Nov 23, 2016

> Just like the U.S. didn't want the U.S.S.R. being the first to land on the
Moon. Moronic reasons, but fitting of politicians

@jonesdave  
well, to be fair, it was also a time of heightened tensions and military
posturing (the cold war) and there was a perceived threat by having a space
advantage and the ability to lob nukes from Russia (with love? LOL)

.

> A bad ROI (like military spending) means more taxes for you in the future.

@AA_P  
personally, i really would like to see more NASA spending. i keep telling my
SEN/REP the same thing... actually told them they should at least double the
NASA budget, and included the argument of ROI

        * but you can't get away from military spending either 

0

Report Block

* * *

**antialias_physorg**

Nov 23, 2016

>         * but you can't get away from military spending either

Probably not in the world we live in (I wish we could - but wishful thinking
and reality are two things).  
But the US could certainly cut 90% of its defense budget without sacrificing
one iota of security.

0

Report Block

* * *

**TheGhostofOtto1923**

Nov 23, 2016

> more NASA spending

NASA is a military organization. Recon is an essential military function. If
you look at its missions they have all been strategic in nature.

For instance they would rather develop the capability to establish bases on
mars moons and visit asteroids (ie take the high ground) than build martian
colonies which is more suited to commercial enterprise. Asteroids are
potential weapons as well as vital sources of strategic materials.

Columbus expeditions were also recon. He established bridgeheads/staging bases
for conquering the americas.

> but wishful thinking... the US could certainly cut 90% of its defense budget
without sacrificing one iota of security

Funny how you talk to yourself without realizing it.

0

Report Block

* * *

Please sign in to add a comment. Registration is free, and takes less than a
minute. Read more

Sign in

Forgot Password  
Registration

##### What do you think about this particular story?

Your feedback will go directly to Science X editors.

Your message to the editors

Your email (only if you want to be contacted back)

Send Feedback

Thank you for taking your time to send in your valued opinion to Science X
editors.

You can be assured our editors closely monitor every feedback sent and will
take appropriate actions. Your opinions are important to us.

We do not guarantee individual replies due to extremely high volume of
correspondence.

###### E-mail the story

##### How bad is the radiation on Mars?

Your friend's email

Your email

I would like to subscribe to Science X Newsletter. Learn more

Your name

###### Note

Your email address is used **only** to let the recipient know who sent the
email. Neither your address nor the recipient's address will be used for any
other purpose. The information you enter will appear in your e-mail message
and is not retained by Phys.org in any form.

Your message

Send

#### Newsletter sign up

Get weekly and/or daily updates delivered to your inbox. You can unsubscribe
at any time and we'll never share your details to third parties.

Subscribe

More information Privacy policy

![Medical

Xpress](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/MedicalXpress.svg)

### Medical Xpress

Medical Xpress covers all medical research advances and health news

![Tech

Xplore](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/techexploer.svg)

### Tech Xplore

Tech Xplore covers the latest engineering, electronics and technology advances

![ScienceX](https://cf3e497594.site.internapcdn.net/tmpl/v6/img/ScienceX.svg)

### ScienceX

Science X Network offers the most comprehensive sci-tech news coverage on the
web

## Newsletters

Subscribe

Science X Daily and the Weekly Email Newsletter are free features that allow
you to receive your favorite sci-tech news updates in your email inbox

## Follow us

            
                            *         *         *         *         * Top
                * Home
                * Search
                * Mobile version
                * Help
                * FAQ
                * About
                * Contact
                * Science X Account
                * Sponsored Account
                * Archive
                * News wire
                * Android app
                * iOS app
                * RSS feeds
                * Push notification
            

(C) Phys.org 2003 - 2019 powered by Science X Network

Privacy policy Terms of use

#### Your Privacy

This site uses cookies to assist with navigation, analyse your use of our
services, and provide content from third parties. By using our site, you
acknowledge that you have read and understand our Privacy Policy and Terms of
Use.

Ok More Information

#### E-mail newsletter

Subscribe

#### Follow us

            
                            *         *         *         * It appears that you are currently using **Ad Blocking software**. What are the consequences?  ×
            

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-5dNhPAnM9r0yY.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

