

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Atmosphere of Earth

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Layer of gases surrounding the planet Earth

"Air" redirects here. For other uses, see Air (disambiguation).

"Qualities of air" redirects here. It is not to be confused with Air quality.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/be/Top_of_Atmosphere.jpg/220px-

Top_of_Atmosphere.jpg)

Blue light is scattered more than other wavelengths by the gases in the
atmosphere, surrounding Earth in a visibly blue layer when seen from space on
board the ISS at an altitude of 335 km (208 mi).[1]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7a/Atmosphere_gas_proportions.svg/220px-

Atmosphere_gas_proportions.svg.png)

Composition of Earth's atmosphere by volume. Lower pie represents trace gases
that together compose about 0.043391% of the atmosphere (0.04402961% at April
2019 concentration [2][3]). Numbers are mainly from 2000, with CO  
2 and methane from 2019, and do not represent any single source.[4]

The **atmosphere of Earth** is the layer of gases, commonly known as **air** ,
that surrounds the planet Earth and is retained by Earth's gravity. The
atmosphere of Earth protects life on Earth by creating pressure allowing for
liquid water to exist on the Earth's surface, absorbing ultraviolet solar
radiation, warming the surface through heat retention (greenhouse effect), and
reducing temperature extremes between day and night (the diurnal temperature
variation).

By volume, dry air contains 78.09% nitrogen, 20.95% oxygen, 0.93% argon, 0.04%
carbon dioxide, and small amounts of other gases.[8] Air also contains a
variable amount of water vapor, on average around 1% at sea level, and 0.4%
over the entire atmosphere. Air content and atmospheric pressure vary at
different layers, and air suitable for use in photosynthesis by terrestrial
plants and breathing of terrestrial animals is found only in Earth's
troposphere and in artificial atmospheres.

The atmosphere has a mass of about 5.15×1018 kg,[9] three quarters of which is
within about 11 km (6.8 mi; 36,000 ft) of the surface. The atmosphere becomes
thinner and thinner with increasing altitude, with no definite boundary
between the atmosphere and outer space. The Kármán line, at 100 km (62 mi), or
1.57% of Earth's radius, is often used as the border between the atmosphere
and outer space. Atmospheric effects become noticeable during atmospheric
reentry of spacecraft at an altitude of around 120 km (75 mi). Several layers
can be distinguished in the atmosphere, based on characteristics such as
temperature and composition.

The study of Earth's atmosphere and its processes is called atmospheric
science (aerology). Early pioneers in the field include Léon Teisserenc de
Bort and Richard Assmann.[10]

## Contents

            
                            * 1 Composition
                * 2 Stratification
                  * 2.1 Exosphere
                  * 2.2 Thermosphere
                  * 2.3 Mesosphere
                  * 2.4 Stratosphere
                  * 2.5 Troposphere
                  * 2.6 Other layers
                * 3 Physical properties
                  * 3.1 Pressure and thickness
                  * 3.2 Temperature and speed of sound
                  * 3.3 Density and mass
                * 4 Optical properties
                  * 4.1 Scattering
                  * 4.2 Absorption
                  * 4.3 Emission
                  * 4.4 Refractive index
                * 5 Circulation
                * 6 Evolution of Earth's atmosphere
                  * 6.1 Earliest atmosphere
                  * 6.2 Second atmosphere
                  * 6.3 Third atmosphere
                  * 6.4 Air pollution
                * 7 Images from space
                * 8 See also
                * 9 References
                * 10 External links
            

## Composition

Main article: Atmospheric chemistry

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a0/Atmospheric_Water_Vapor_Mean.2005.030.jpg/220px-

Atmospheric_Water_Vapor_Mean.2005.030.jpg)

Mean atmospheric water vapor

The three major constituents of Earth's atmosphere are nitrogen, oxygen, and
argon. Water vapor accounts for roughly 0.25% of the atmosphere by mass. The
concentration of water vapor (a greenhouse gas) varies significantly from
around 10 ppm by volume in the coldest portions of the atmosphere to as much
as 5% by volume in hot, humid air masses, and concentrations of other
atmospheric gases are typically quoted in terms of dry air (without water
vapor).[11] The remaining gases are often referred to as trace gases,[12]
among which are the greenhouse gases, principally carbon dioxide, methane,
nitrous oxide, and ozone. Besides argon, already mentioned, other noble gases,
neon, helium, krypton, and xenon are also present. Filtered air includes trace
amounts of many other chemical compounds. Many substances of natural origin
may be present in locally and seasonally variable small amounts as aerosols in
an unfiltered air sample, including dust of mineral and organic composition,
pollen and spores, sea spray, and volcanic ash. Various industrial pollutants
also may be present as gases or aerosols, such as chlorine (elemental or in
compounds), fluorine compounds and elemental mercury vapor. Sulfur compounds
such as hydrogen sulfide and sulfur dioxide (SO2) may be derived from natural
sources or from industrial air pollution.

**Major constituents of dry air, by volume** [8] Gas | **Volume** (A)  
---|---  
Name | Formula | **inppmv** (B) | in %  
Nitrogen | N2 | 780,840 | 78.084  
Oxygen | O2 | 209,460 | 20.946  
Argon | Ar | 9,340 | 0.9340  
Carbon dioxide | CO  
2 | 413.32 | 0.041332  
Neon | Ne | 18.18 | 0.001818  
Helium | He | 5.24 | 0.000524  
Methane | CH4 | 1.87 | 0.000187  
Krypton | Kr | 1.14 | 0.000114  
Not included in above dry atmosphere:  
Water vapor(C) | H2O | 0–30,000(D) | 0–3%(D)  
**notes:**

(A) volume fraction is equal to mole fraction for ideal gas only,  
also see volume (thermodynamics)  
(B) ppmv: parts per million by volume  
(C) Water vapor is about 0.25% _by mass_ over full atmosphere  
(D) Water vapor strongly varies locally[11]

The relative concentration of gases remains constant until about 10,000 m
(33,000 ft).[13]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6d/Msis_atmospheric_composition_by_height.svg/220px-

Msis_atmospheric_composition_by_height.svg.png)

The volume fraction of the main constituents of the Earth's atmosphere as a
function of height according to the MSIS-E-90 atmospheric model.

## Stratification

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8c/Earth%27s_atmosphere.svg/220px-

Earth%27s_atmosphere.svg.png)

**Earth's atmosphere** Lower 4 layers of the atmosphere in 3 dimensions as
seen diagonally from above the exobase. Layers drawn to scale, objects within
the layers are not to scale. Aurorae shown here at the bottom of the
thermosphere can actually form at any altitude in this atmospheric layer.

In general, air pressure and density decrease with altitude in the atmosphere.
However, temperature has a more complicated profile with altitude, and may
remain relatively constant or even increase with altitude in some regions (see
the temperature section, below). Because the general pattern of the
temperature/altitude profile is constant and measurable by means of
instrumented balloon soundings, the temperature behavior provides a useful
metric to distinguish atmospheric layers. In this way, Earth's atmosphere can
be divided (called atmospheric stratification) into five main layers.
Excluding the exosphere, the atmosphere has four primary layers, which are the
troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere, and thermosphere.[14] From highest to
lowest, the five main layers are:

            
                            * Exosphere: 700 to 10,000 km (440 to 6,200 miles)
                * Thermosphere: 80 to 700 km (50 to 440 miles)[15]
                * Mesosphere: 50 to 80 km (31 to 50 miles)
                * Stratosphere: 12 to 50 km (7 to 31 miles)
                * Troposphere: 0 to 12 km (0 to 7 miles)[16]
            

### Exosphere

Main article: Exosphere

The exosphere is the outermost layer of Earth's atmosphere (i.e. the upper
limit of the atmosphere). It extends from the exobase, which is located at the
top of the thermosphere at an altitude of about 700 km above sea level, to
about 10,000 km (6,200 mi; 33,000,000 ft) where it merges into the solar wind.

This layer is mainly composed of extremely low densities of hydrogen, helium
and several heavier molecules including nitrogen, oxygen and carbon dioxide
closer to the exobase. The atoms and molecules are so far apart that they can
travel hundreds of kilometers without colliding with one another. Thus, the
exosphere no longer behaves like a gas, and the particles constantly escape
into space. These free-moving particles follow ballistic trajectories and may
migrate in and out of the magnetosphere or the solar wind.

The exosphere is located too far above Earth for any meteorological phenomena
to be possible. However, the aurora borealis and aurora australis sometimes
occur in the lower part of the exosphere, where they overlap into the
thermosphere. The exosphere contains most of the satellites orbiting Earth.

### Thermosphere

Main article: Thermosphere

The thermosphere is the second-highest layer of Earth's atmosphere. It extends
from the mesopause (which separates it from the mesosphere) at an altitude of
about 80 km (50 mi; 260,000 ft) up to the thermopause at an altitude range of
500–1000 km (310–620 mi; 1,600,000–3,300,000 ft). The height of the
thermopause varies considerably due to changes in solar activity.[15] Because
the thermopause lies at the lower boundary of the exosphere, it is also
referred to as the exobase. The lower part of the thermosphere, from 80 to 550
kilometres (50 to 342 mi) above Earth's surface, contains the ionosphere.

The temperature of the thermosphere gradually increases with height. Unlike
the stratosphere beneath it, wherein a temperature inversion is due to the
absorption of radiation by ozone, the inversion in the thermosphere occurs due
to the extremely low density of its molecules. The temperature of this layer
can rise as high as 1500 °C (2700 °F), though the gas molecules are so far
apart that its temperature in the usual sense is not very meaningful. The air
is so rarefied that an individual molecule (of oxygen, for example) travels an
average of 1 kilometre (0.62 mi; 3300 ft) between collisions with other
molecules.[17] Although the thermosphere has a high proportion of molecules
with high energy, it would not feel hot to a human in direct contact, because
its density is too low to conduct a significant amount of energy to or from
the skin.

This layer is completely cloudless and free of water vapor. However, non-
hydrometeorological phenomena such as the aurora borealis and aurora australis
are occasionally seen in the thermosphere. The International Space Station
orbits in this layer, between 350 and 420 km (220 and 260 mi).

### Mesosphere

Main article: Mesosphere

The mesosphere is the third highest layer of Earth's atmosphere, occupying the
region above the stratosphere and below the thermosphere. It extends from the
stratopause at an altitude of about 50 km (31 mi; 160,000 ft) to the mesopause
at 80–85 km (50–53 mi; 260,000–280,000 ft) above sea level.

Temperatures drop with increasing altitude to the mesopause that marks the top
of this middle layer of the atmosphere. It is the coldest place on Earth and
has an average temperature around −85 °C (−120 °F; 190 K).[18][19]

Just below the mesopause, the air is so cold that even the very scarce water
vapor at this altitude can be sublimated into polar-mesospheric noctilucent
clouds. These are the highest clouds in the atmosphere and may be visible to
the naked eye if sunlight reflects off them about an hour or two after sunset
or a similar length of time before sunrise. They are most readily visible when
the Sun is around 4 to 16 degrees below the horizon. Lightning-induced
discharges known as transient luminous events (TLEs) occasionally form in the
mesosphere above tropospheric thunderclouds. The mesosphere is also the layer
where most meteors burn up upon atmospheric entrance. It is too high above
Earth to be accessible to jet-powered aircraft and balloons, and too low to
permit orbital spacecraft. The mesosphere is mainly accessed by sounding
rockets and rocket-powered aircraft.

### Stratosphere

Main article: Stratosphere

The stratosphere is the second-lowest layer of Earth's atmosphere. It lies
above the troposphere and is separated from it by the tropopause. This layer
extends from the top of the troposphere at roughly 12 km (7.5 mi; 39,000 ft)
above Earth's surface to the stratopause at an altitude of about 50 to 55 km
(31 to 34 mi; 164,000 to 180,000 ft).

The atmospheric pressure at the top of the stratosphere is roughly 1/1000 the
pressure at sea level. It contains the ozone layer, which is the part of
Earth's atmosphere that contains relatively high concentrations of that gas.
The stratosphere defines a layer in which temperatures rise with increasing
altitude. This rise in temperature is caused by the absorption of ultraviolet
radiation (UV) radiation from the Sun by the ozone layer, which restricts
turbulence and mixing. Although the temperature may be −60 °C (−76 °F; 210 K)
at the tropopause, the top of the stratosphere is much warmer, and may be near
0 °C.[20]

The stratospheric temperature profile creates very stable atmospheric
conditions, so the stratosphere lacks the weather-producing air turbulence
that is so prevalent in the troposphere. Consequently, the stratosphere is
almost completely free of clouds and other forms of weather. However, polar
stratospheric or nacreous clouds are occasionally seen in the lower part of
this layer of the atmosphere where the air is coldest. The stratosphere is the
highest layer that can be accessed by jet-powered aircraft.

### Troposphere

Main article: Troposphere

The troposphere is the lowest layer of Earth's atmosphere. It extends from
Earth's surface to an average height of about 12 km (7.5 mi; 39,000 ft),
although this altitude varies from about 9 km (5.6 mi; 30,000 ft) at the
geographic poles to 17 km (11 mi; 56,000 ft) at the Equator,[16] with some
variation due to weather. The troposphere is bounded above by the tropopause,
a boundary marked in most places by a temperature inversion (i.e. a layer of
relatively warm air above a colder one), and in others by a zone which is
isothermal with height.[21][22]

Although variations do occur, the temperature usually declines with increasing
altitude in the troposphere because the troposphere is mostly heated through
energy transfer from the surface. Thus, the lowest part of the troposphere
(i.e. Earth's surface) is typically the warmest section of the troposphere.
This promotes vertical mixing (hence, the origin of its name in the Greek word
τρόπος, _tropos_ , meaning "turn"). The troposphere contains roughly 80% of
the mass of Earth's atmosphere.[23] The troposphere is denser than all its
overlying atmospheric layers because a larger atmospheric weight sits on top
of the troposphere and causes it to be most severely compressed. Fifty percent
of the total mass of the atmosphere is located in the lower 5.6 km (3.5 mi;
18,000 ft) of the troposphere.

Nearly all atmospheric water vapor or moisture is found in the troposphere, so
it is the layer where most of Earth's weather takes place. It has basically
all the weather-associated cloud genus types generated by active wind
circulation, although very tall cumulonimbus thunder clouds can penetrate the
tropopause from below and rise into the lower part of the stratosphere. Most
conventional aviation activity takes place in the troposphere, and it is the
only layer that can be accessed by propeller-driven aircraft.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6b/Endeavour_silhouette_STS-130.jpg/220px-

Endeavour_silhouette_STS-130.jpg)

Space Shuttle _Endeavour_ orbiting in the thermosphere. Because of the angle
of the photo, it appears to straddle the stratosphere and mesosphere that
actually lie more than 250 km below. The orange layer is the troposphere,
which gives way to the whitish stratosphere and then the blue mesosphere.[24]

### Other layers

Within the five principal layers above, that are largely determined by
temperature, several secondary layers may be distinguished by other
properties:

            
                            * The ozone layer is contained within the stratosphere. In this layer ozone concentrations are about 2 to 8 parts per million, which is much higher than in the lower atmosphere but still very small compared to the main components of the atmosphere. It is mainly located in the lower portion of the stratosphere from about 15–35 km (9.3–21.7 mi; 49,000–115,000 ft), though the thickness varies seasonally and geographically. About 90% of the ozone in Earth's atmosphere is contained in the stratosphere.
                * The ionosphere is a region of the atmosphere that is ionized by solar radiation. It is responsible for auroras. During daytime hours, it stretches from 50 to 1,000 km (31 to 621 mi; 160,000 to 3,280,000 ft) and includes the mesosphere, thermosphere, and parts of the exosphere. However, ionization in the mesosphere largely ceases during the night, so auroras are normally seen only in the thermosphere and lower exosphere. The ionosphere forms the inner edge of the magnetosphere. It has practical importance because it influences, for example, radio propagation on Earth.
                * The homosphere and heterosphere are defined by whether the atmospheric gases are well mixed. The surface-based homosphere includes the troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere, and the lowest part of the thermosphere, where the chemical composition of the atmosphere does not depend on molecular weight because the gases are mixed by turbulence.[25] This relatively homogeneous layer ends at the _turbopause_ found at about 100 km (62 mi; 330,000 ft), the very edge of space itself as accepted by the FAI, which places it about 20 km (12 mi; 66,000 ft) above the mesopause.
            
            Above this altitude lies the heterosphere, which includes the exosphere and most of the thermosphere. Here, the chemical composition varies with altitude. This is because the distance that particles can move without colliding with one another is large compared with the size of motions that cause mixing. This allows the gases to stratify by molecular weight, with the heavier ones, such as oxygen and nitrogen, present only near the bottom of the heterosphere. The upper part of the heterosphere is composed almost completely of hydrogen, the lightest element.[ _clarification needed_ ]
                * The planetary boundary layer is the part of the troposphere that is closest to Earth's surface and is directly affected by it, mainly through turbulent diffusion. During the day the planetary boundary layer usually is well-mixed, whereas at night it becomes stably stratified with weak or intermittent mixing. The depth of the planetary boundary layer ranges from as little as about 100 metres (330 ft) on clear, calm nights to 3,000 m (9,800 ft) or more during the afternoon in dry regions.
            

The average temperature of the atmosphere at Earth's surface is 14 °C (57 °F;
287 K)[26] or 15 °C (59 °F; 288 K),[27] depending on the
reference.[28][29][30]

## Physical properties

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9d/Comparison_US_standard_atmosphere_1962.svg/250px-

Comparison_US_standard_atmosphere_1962.svg.png)

Comparison of the 1962 US Standard Atmosphere graph of geometric altitude
against air density, pressure, the speed of sound and temperature with
approximate altitudes of various objects.[31]

### Pressure and thickness

Main article: Atmospheric pressure

The average atmospheric pressure at sea level is defined by the International
Standard Atmosphere as 101325 pascals (760.00 Torr; 14.6959 psi; 760.00 mmHg).
This is sometimes referred to as a unit of standard atmospheres (atm). Total
atmospheric mass is 5.1480×1018 kg (1.135×1019 lb),[32] about 2.5% less than
would be inferred from the average sea level pressure and Earth's area of
51007.2 megahectares, this portion being displaced by Earth's mountainous
terrain. Atmospheric pressure is the total weight of the air above unit area
at the point where the pressure is measured. Thus air pressure varies with
location and weather.

If the entire mass of the atmosphere had a uniform density equal to sea level
density (about 1.2 kg per m3) from sea level upwards, it would terminate
abruptly at an altitude of 8.50 km (27,900 ft). It actually decreases
exponentially with altitude, dropping by half every 5.6 km (18,000 ft) or by a
factor of 1/e every 7.64 km (25,100 ft), the average scale height of the
atmosphere below 70 km (43 mi; 230,000 ft). However, the atmosphere is more
accurately modeled with a customized equation for each layer that takes
gradients of temperature, molecular composition, solar radiation and gravity
into account.

In summary, the mass of Earth's atmosphere is distributed approximately as
follows:[33]

            
                            * 50% is below 5.6 km (18,000 ft).
                * 90% is below 16 km (52,000 ft).
                * 99.99997% is below 100 km (62 mi; 330,000 ft), the Kármán line. By international convention, this marks the beginning of space where human travelers are considered astronauts.
            

By comparison, the summit of Mt. Everest is at 8,848 m (29,029 ft); commercial
airliners typically cruise between 10 and 13 km (33,000 and 43,000 ft) where
the thinner air improves fuel economy; weather balloons reach 30.4 km (100,000
ft) and above; and the highest X-15 flight in 1963 reached 108.0 km (354,300
ft).

Even above the Kármán line, significant atmospheric effects such as auroras
still occur. Meteors begin to glow in this region, though the larger ones may
not burn up until they penetrate more deeply. The various layers of Earth's
ionosphere, important to HF radio propagation, begin below 100 km and extend
beyond 500 km. By comparison, the International Space Station and Space
Shuttle typically orbit at 350–400 km, within the F-layer of the ionosphere
where they encounter enough atmospheric drag to require reboosts every few
months. Depending on solar activity, satellites can experience noticeable
atmospheric drag at altitudes as high as 700–800 km.

### Temperature and speed of sound

Main articles: Atmospheric temperature and Speed of sound

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/ce/Atmospheric_Temperature_Trend.jpg/220px-

Atmospheric_Temperature_Trend.jpg)

Temperature trends in two thick layers of the atmosphere as measured between
January 1979 and December 2005 by Microwave Sounding Units and Advanced
Microwave Sounding Units on NOAA weather satellites. The instruments record
microwaves emitted from oxygen molecules in the atmosphere. Source:[34]

The division of the atmosphere into layers mostly by reference to temperature
is discussed above. Temperature decreases with altitude starting at sea level,
but variations in this trend begin above 11 km, where the temperature
stabilizes through a large vertical distance through the rest of the
troposphere. In the stratosphere, starting above about 20 km, the temperature
increases with height, due to heating within the ozone layer caused by capture
of significant ultraviolet radiation from the Sun by the dioxygen and ozone
gas in this region. Still another region of increasing temperature with
altitude occurs at very high altitudes, in the aptly-named thermosphere above
90 km.

Because in an ideal gas of constant composition the speed of sound depends
only on temperature and not on the gas pressure or density, the speed of sound
in the atmosphere with altitude takes on the form of the complicated
temperature profile (see illustration to the right), and does not mirror
altitudinal changes in density or pressure.

### Density and mass

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/de/Atmosphere_model.png/220px-

Atmosphere_model.png)

Temperature and mass density against altitude from the NRLMSISE-00 standard
atmosphere model (the eight dotted lines in each "decade" are at the eight
cubes 8, 27, 64, ..., 729)

Main article: Density of air

The density of air at sea level is about 1.2 kg/m3 (1.2 g/L, 0.0012 g/cm3).
Density is not measured directly but is calculated from measurements of
temperature, pressure and humidity using the equation of state for air (a form
of the ideal gas law). Atmospheric density decreases as the altitude
increases. This variation can be approximately modeled using the barometric
formula. More sophisticated models are used to predict orbital decay of
satellites.

The average mass of the atmosphere is about 5 quadrillion (5×1015) tonnes or
1/1,200,000 the mass of Earth. According to the American National Center for
Atmospheric Research, "The total mean mass of the atmosphere is 5.1480×1018 kg
with an annual range due to water vapor of 1.2 or 1.5×1015 kg, depending on
whether surface pressure or water vapor data are used; somewhat smaller than
the previous estimate. The mean mass of water vapor is estimated as 1.27×1016
kg and the dry air mass as 5.1352 ±0.0003×1018 kg."

## Optical properties

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section by
adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and
removed. _( October 2013)_ _(Learn how and when to remove this template
message)_

---|--- 

See also: Sunlight

Solar radiation (or sunlight) is the energy Earth receives from the Sun. Earth
also emits radiation back into space, but at longer wavelengths that we cannot
see. Part of the incoming and emitted radiation is absorbed or reflected by
the atmosphere. In May 2017, glints of light, seen as twinkling from an
orbiting satellite a million miles away, were found to be reflected light from
ice crystals in the atmosphere.[35][36]

### Scattering

Main article: Atmospheric scattering

When light passes through Earth's atmosphere, photons interact with it through
_scattering_. If the light does not interact with the atmosphere, it is called
_direct radiation_ and is what you see if you were to look directly at the
Sun. _Indirect radiation_ is light that has been scattered in the atmosphere.
For example, on an overcast day when you cannot see your shadow there is no
direct radiation reaching you, it has all been scattered. As another example,
due to a phenomenon called Rayleigh scattering, shorter (blue) wavelengths
scatter more easily than longer (red) wavelengths. This is why the sky looks
blue; you are seeing scattered blue light. This is also why sunsets are red.
Because the Sun is close to the horizon, the Sun's rays pass through more
atmosphere than normal to reach your eye. Much of the blue light has been
scattered out, leaving the red light in a sunset.

### Absorption

Main article: Absorption (electromagnetic radiation)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/34/Atmospheric_electromagnetic_opacity.svg/220px-

Atmospheric_electromagnetic_opacity.svg.png)

Rough plot of Earth's atmospheric transmittance (or opacity) to various
wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation, including visible light.

Different molecules absorb different wavelengths of radiation. For example, O2
and O3 absorb almost all wavelengths shorter than 300 nanometers. Water (H2O)
absorbs many wavelengths above 700 nm. When a molecule absorbs a photon, it
increases the energy of the molecule. This heats the atmosphere, but the
atmosphere also cools by emitting radiation, as discussed below.

The combined absorption spectra of the gases in the atmosphere leave "windows"
of low opacity, allowing the transmission of only certain bands of light. The
optical window runs from around 300 nm (ultraviolet-C) up into the range
humans can see, the visible spectrum (commonly called light), at roughly
400–700 nm and continues to the infrared to around 1100 nm. There are also
infrared and radio windows that transmit some infrared and radio waves at
longer wavelengths. For example, the radio window runs from about one
centimeter to about eleven-meter waves.

### Emission

Further information: Emission (electromagnetic radiation)

_Emission_ is the opposite of absorption, it is when an object emits
radiation. Objects tend to emit amounts and wavelengths of radiation depending
on their "black body" emission curves, therefore hotter objects tend to emit
more radiation, with shorter wavelengths. Colder objects emit less radiation,
with longer wavelengths. For example, the Sun is approximately 6,000 K (5,730
°C; 10,340 °F), its radiation peaks near 500 nm, and is visible to the human
eye. Earth is approximately 290 K (17 °C; 62 °F), so its radiation peaks near
10,000 nm, and is much too long to be visible to humans.

Because of its temperature, the atmosphere emits infrared radiation. For
example, on clear nights Earth's surface cools down faster than on cloudy
nights. This is because clouds (H2O) are strong absorbers and emitters of
infrared radiation. This is also why it becomes colder at night at higher
elevations.

The greenhouse effect is directly related to this absorption and emission
effect. Some gases in the atmosphere absorb and emit infrared radiation, but
do not interact with sunlight in the visible spectrum. Common examples of
these are CO  
2 and H2O.

### Refractive index

Main article: Atmospheric refraction

See also: Scintillation (astronomy)

The refractive index of air is close to, but just greater than 1. Systematic
variations in refractive index can lead to the bending of light rays over long
optical paths. One example is that, under some circumstances, observers
onboard ships can see other vessels just over the horizon because light is
refracted in the same direction as the curvature of Earth's surface.

The refractive index of air depends on temperature,[37] giving rise to
refraction effects when the temperature gradient is large. An example of such
effects is the mirage.

## Circulation

Main article: Atmospheric circulation

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cd/AtmosphCirc2.png/220px-

AtmosphCirc2.png)

An idealised view of three large circulation cells.

_Atmospheric circulation_ is the large-scale movement of air through the
troposphere, and the means (with ocean circulation) by which heat is
distributed around Earth. The large-scale structure of the atmospheric
circulation varies from year to year, but the basic structure remains fairly
constant because it is determined by Earth's rotation rate and the difference
in solar radiation between the equator and poles.

## Evolution of Earth's atmosphere

See also: History of Earth and Paleoclimatology

### Earliest atmosphere

The first atmosphere consisted of gases in the solar nebula, primarily
hydrogen. There were probably simple hydrides such as those now found in the
gas giants (Jupiter and Saturn), notably water vapor, methane and ammonia.[38]

### Second atmosphere

Outgassing from volcanism, supplemented by gases produced during the late
heavy bombardment of Earth by huge asteroids, produced the next atmosphere,
consisting largely of nitrogen plus carbon dioxide and inert gases.[38] A
major part of carbon-dioxide emissions dissolved in water and reacted with
metals such as calcium and magnesium during weathering of crustal rocks to
form carbonates that were deposited as sediments. Water-related sediments have
been found that date from as early as 3.8 billion years ago.[39]

About 3.4 billion years ago, nitrogen formed the major part of the then stable
"second atmosphere". The influence of life has to be taken into account rather
soon in the history of the atmosphere, because hints of early life-forms
appear as early as 3.5 billion years ago.[40] How Earth at that time
maintained a climate warm enough for liquid water and life, if the early Sun
put out 30% lower solar radiance than today, is a puzzle known as the "faint
young Sun paradox".

The geological record however shows a continuous relatively warm surface
during the complete early temperature record of Earth – with the exception of
one cold glacial phase about 2.4 billion years ago. In the late Archean Eon an
oxygen-containing atmosphere began to develop, apparently produced by
photosynthesizing cyanobacteria (see Great Oxygenation Event), which have been
found as stromatolite fossils from 2.7 billion years ago. The early basic
carbon isotopy (isotope ratio proportions) strongly suggests conditions
similar to the current, and that the fundamental features of the carbon cycle
became established as early as 4 billion years ago.

Ancient sediments in the Gabon dating from between about 2,150 and 2,080
million years ago provide a record of Earth's dynamic oxygenation evolution.
These fluctuations in oxygenation were likely driven by the Lomagundi carbon
isotope excursion.[41]

### Third atmosphere

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f3/Sauerstoffgehalt-1000mj2.png/220px-

Sauerstoffgehalt-1000mj2.png)

Oxygen content of the atmosphere over the last billion years[42][43]

The constant re-arrangement of continents by plate tectonics influences the
long-term evolution of the atmosphere by transferring carbon dioxide to and
from large continental carbonate stores. Free oxygen did not exist in the
atmosphere until about 2.4 billion years ago during the Great Oxygenation
Event and its appearance is indicated by the end of the banded iron
formations.

Before this time, any oxygen produced by photosynthesis was consumed by
oxidation of reduced materials, notably iron. Molecules of free oxygen did not
start to accumulate in the atmosphere until the rate of production of oxygen
began to exceed the availability of reducing materials that removed oxygen.
This point signifies a shift from a reducing atmosphere to an oxidizing
atmosphere. O2 showed major variations until reaching a steady state of more
than 15% by the end of the Precambrian.[44] The following time span from 541
million years ago to the present day is the Phanerozoic Eon, during the
earliest period of which, the Cambrian, oxygen-requiring metazoan life forms
began to appear.

The amount of oxygen in the atmosphere has fluctuated over the last 600
million years, reaching a peak of about 30% around 280 million years ago,
significantly higher than today's 21%. Two main processes govern changes in
the atmosphere: Plants use carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, releasing
oxygen. Breakdown of pyrite and volcanic eruptions release sulfur into the
atmosphere, which oxidizes and hence reduces the amount of oxygen in the
atmosphere. However, volcanic eruptions also release carbon dioxide, which
plants can convert to oxygen. The exact cause of the variation of the amount
of oxygen in the atmosphere is not known. Periods with much oxygen in the
atmosphere are associated with rapid development of animals. Today's
atmosphere contains 21% oxygen, which is great enough for this rapid
development of animals.[45]

### Air pollution

Main article: Air pollution

_Air pollution_ is the introduction into the atmosphere of chemicals,
particulate matter or biological materials that cause harm or discomfort to
organisms.[46] Stratospheric ozone depletion is caused by air pollution,
chiefly from chlorofluorocarbons and other ozone-depleting substances.

The scientific consensus is that the anthropogenic greenhouse gases currently
accumulating in the atmosphere are the main cause of global warming.[47]

![File:Watching the Earth

Breathe.ogv](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/03/Watching_the_Earth_Breathe.ogv/220px

--Watching_the_Earth_Breathe.ogv.jpg)Play media

Animation shows the buildup of tropospheric CO  
2 in the Northern Hemisphere with a maximum around May. The maximum in the
vegetation cycle follows in the late summer. Following the peak in vegetation,
the drawdown of atmospheric CO  
2 due to photosynthesis is apparent, particularly over the boreal forests.

## Images from space

Main article: Weather satellite

On October 19, 2015 NASA started a website containing daily images of the full
sunlit side of Earth on http://epic.gsfc.nasa.gov/. The images are taken from
the Deep Space Climate Observatory (DSCOVR) and show Earth as it rotates
during a day.[48]

            
                            * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/be/Top_of_Atmosphere.jpg/160px-Top_of_Atmosphere.jpg)
            

Blue light is scattered more than other wavelengths by the gases in the
atmosphere, giving Earth a blue halo when seen from space.

            
                            * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/de/ISS003-ESC-6152.jpg/160px-ISS003-ESC-6152.jpg)
            

The geomagnetic storms cause beautiful displays of aurora across the
atmosphere.

            
                            * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/13/Sunset_from_the_ISS.JPG/160px-Sunset_from_the_ISS.JPG)
            

Limb view, of Earth's atmosphere. Colors roughly denote the layers of the
atmosphere.

            
                            * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7f/Moon_Limb_%26_Troposphere.JPG/160px-Moon_Limb_%26_Troposphere.JPG)
            

This image shows the Moon at the centre, with the limb of Earth near the
bottom transitioning into the orange-colored troposphere. The troposphere ends
abruptly at the tropopause, which appears in the image as the sharp boundary
between the orange- and blue-colored atmosphere. The silvery-blue noctilucent
clouds extend far above Earth's troposphere.

            
                            * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/cd/Earth_Eclipses_Sun-ap12-s80-37406.jpg/160px-Earth_Eclipses_Sun-ap12-s80-37406.jpg)
            

Earth's atmosphere backlit by the Sun in an eclipse observed from deep space
onboard Apollo 12 in 1969.

## See also

            
                            * Aerial perspective
                * Air (classical element)
                * Air glow
                * Airshed
                * Atmosphere (on atmospheres in general)
                * Atmospheric dispersion modeling
                * Atmospheric electricity
                * Atmospheric models
                * Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Climate Research Facility (ARM) (in the U.S.)
                * Atmospheric stratification
                * Biosphere
                * Climate system
                * Compressed air
                * COSPAR international reference atmosphere (CIRA)
                * Environmental impact of aviation
                * Global dimming
                * Historical temperature record
                * Hydrosphere
                * Hypermobility (travel)
                * Kyoto Protocol
                * Leaching (agriculture)
                * Lithosphere
                * Standard Dry Air
                * U.S. Standard Atmosphere
                * Warm period
            
                * ![Aegopodium podagraria1 ies.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg/24px-Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg)Environment portal
            

## References

            
                            1. **^** "Gateway to Astonaut Photos of Earth". NASA. Retrieved  2018-01-29.
                2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Trends in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide", _Global Greenhouse Gas Reference Network, NOAA_ , 2019, retrieved 2019-05-31
                3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Trends in Atmospheric Methane", _Global Greenhouse Gas Reference Network, NOAA_ , 2019, retrieved 2019-05-31
                4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Haynes, H. M., ed. (2016–2017), _CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics_ (97th ed.), CRC Press, p. 14-3, ISBN 978-1-4987-5428-6, which cites _Allen's Astrophysical Quantities_ but includes only ten of its largest constituents.
                5. **^** Cox, Arthur N., ed. (2000), _Allen's Astrophysical Quantities_ (Fourth ed.), AIP Press, pp. 258–259, ISBN 0-387-98746-0, which rounds N2 and O2 to four significant digits without affecting the total because 0.004% was removed from N2 and added to O2. It includes 20 constituents.
                6. **^** National Aeronautics and Space Administration (1976), _U.S. Standard Atmosphere, 1976_ (PDF), p. 3
                7. **^** Allen, C. W. (1976), _Astrophysical Quantities_ (Third ed.), Athlone Press, p. 119, ISBN 0-485-11150-0
                8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Two recent reliable sources cited here have total atmospheric compositions, including trace molecules, that exceed 100%. They are _Allen's Astrophysical Quantities_[5] (2000, 100.001241343%) and _CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics_[4] (2016–2017, 100.004667%), which cites _Allen's Astrophysical Quantities_. Both are used as references in this article. Both exceed 100% because their CO 2 values were increased to 345 ppmv, without changing their other constituents to compensate. This is made worse by the April 2019 CO
            

2 value, which is 413.32 ppmv.[2] Although minor, the January 2019 value for
CH  
4 is 1866.1 ppbv (parts per billion).[3] Two older reliable sources have dry
atmospheric compositions, including trace molecules, that total less than
100%: _U.S. Standard Atmosphere, 1976_ [6] (99.9997147%); and _Astrophysical
Quantities_ [7] (1976, 99.9999357%).

            
                            9. **^** Lide, David R. _Handbook of Chemistry and Physics_. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 1996: 14–17
                10. **^** M. Vázquez; A. Hanslmeier (2006). _Ultraviolet Radiation in the Solar System_. _Astrophysics and Space Science Library_. **331**. Springer Science  & Business Media. p. 17. Bibcode:2005ASSL..331.....V. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-3730-6 (inactive 2019-02-19). ISBN 978-1-4020-3730-6.
                11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Wallace, John M. and Peter V. Hobbs. _Atmospheric Science: An Introductory Survey_. Elsevier. Second Edition, 2006. ISBN 978-0-12-732951-2. Chapter 1
                12. **^** "Trace Gases". Ace.mmu.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 9 October 2010. Retrieved  2010-10-16.
                13. **^** "Air Composition". The Engineering ToolBox. Retrieved  2017-07-04. "The composition of air is unchanged until elevation of approximately 10.000 m"
                14. **^** Zell, Holly (2015-03-02). "Earth's Upper Atmosphere". _NASA_. Retrieved  2017-02-20.
                15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Randy Russell (2008). "The Thermosphere". Retrieved 2013-10-18.
                16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "The height of the tropopause". Das.uwyo.edu. Retrieved  2012-04-18.
                17. **^** Ahrens, C. Donald. Essentials of Meteorology. Published by Thomson Brooks/Cole, 2005.
                18. **^** States, Robert J.; Gardner, Chester S. (January 2000). "Thermal Structure of the Mesopause Region (80–105 km) at 40°N Latitude. Part I: Seasonal Variations". _Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences_. **57** (1): 66–77. Bibcode:2000JAtS...57...66S. doi:10.1175/1520-0469(2000)057<0066:TSOTMR>2.0.CO;2.
                19. **^** Joe Buchdahl. "Atmosphere, Climate & Environment Information Programme". Ace.mmu.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 2010-07-01. Retrieved 2012-04-18.
                20. **^** Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences (1993). "stratopause". Retrieved 2013-10-18.
                21. **^** Barry, R.G.; Chorley, R.J. (1971). _Atmosphere, Weather and Climate_. London: Menthuen  & Co Ltd. p. 65.
                22. **^** Tyson, P.D.; Preston-Whyte, R.A. (2013). _The Weather and Climate of Southern Africa_ (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 4.
                23. **^** "Troposphere". _Concise Encyclopedia of Science & Technology_. McGraw-Hill. 1984. "It contains about four-fifths of the mass of the whole atmosphere."
                24. **^** "ISS022-E-062672 caption". NASA. Retrieved  21 September 2012.
                25. **^** " _homosphere_ – AMS Glossary". Amsglossary.allenpress.com. Archived from the original on 14 September 2010. Retrieved  2010-10-16.
                26. **^** "Earth's Atmosphere". Archived from the original on 2009-06-14.
                27. **^** "NASA – Earth Fact Sheet". Nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov. Archived from the original on 30 October 2010. Retrieved  2010-10-16.
                28. **^** "Global Surface Temperature Anomalies". Archived from the original on 2009-03-03.
                29. **^** "Earth's Radiation Balance and Oceanic Heat Fluxes". Archived from the original on 2005-03-03.
                30. **^** "Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Control Run" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-05-28.
                31. **^** Geometric altitude vs. temperature, pressure, density, and the speed of sound derived from the 1962 U.S. Standard Atmosphere.
                32. **^** Trenberth, Kevin E.; Smith, Lesley (1970-01-01). "The Mass of the Atmosphere: A Constraint on Global Analyses". _Journal of Climate_. **18** (6): 864. Bibcode:2005JCli...18..864T. doi:10.1175/JCLI-3299.1.
                33. **^** Lutgens, Frederick K. and Edward J. Tarbuck (1995) _The Atmosphere_ , Prentice Hall, 6th ed., pp. 14–17, ISBN 0-13-350612-6
                34. **^** "Atmospheric Temperature Trends, 1979–2005 : Image of the Day". Earthobservatory.nasa.gov. 2000-01-01. Retrieved  2014-06-10.
                35. **^** St. Fleur, Nicholas (19 May 2017). "Spotting Mysterious Twinkles on Earth From a Million Miles Away". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  20 May 2017.
                36. **^** Marshak, Alexander; Várnai, Tamás; Kostinski, Alexander (15 May 2017). "Terrestrial glint seen from deep space: oriented ice crystals detected from the Lagrangian point". _Geophysical Research Letters_. **44** (10): 5197. Bibcode:2017GeoRL..44.5197M. doi:10.1002/2017GL073248.
                37. **^** Edlén, Bengt (1966). "The refractive index of air". _Metrologia_. **2** (2): 71–80. Bibcode:1966Metro...2...71E. doi:10.1088/0026-1394/2/2/002.
                38. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Zahnle, K.; Schaefer, L.; Fegley, B. (2010). "Earth's Earliest Atmospheres". _Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology_. **2** (10): a004895. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a004895. PMC 2944365. PMID 20573713.
                39. **^** B. Windley: _The Evolving Continents._ Wiley Press, New York 1984
                40. **^** J. Schopf: _Earth's Earliest Biosphere: Its Origin and Evolution._ Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1983
                41. **^** Timothy W. Lyons, Christopher T. Reinhard & Noah J. Planavsky (2014). "Atmospheric oxygenation three billion years ago". _Nature_. **506** (7488): 307–15. Bibcode:2014Natur.506..307L. doi:10.1038/nature13068. PMID 24553238.
                42. **^** Martin, Daniel; McKenna, Helen; Livina, Valerie (2016). "The human physiological impact of global deoxygenation". _The Journal of Physiological Sciences_. **67** (1): 97–106. doi:10.1007/s12576-016-0501-0. ISSN 1880-6546. PMC 5138252. PMID 27848144.
                43. **^** http://www.nap.edu/openbook/0309100615/gifmid/30.gif
                44. **^** Christopher R. Scotese, Back to Earth History : Summary Chart for the Precambrian, Paleomar Project
                45. **^** Peter Ward:[1] Out of Thin Air: Dinosaurs, Birds, and Earth's Ancient Atmosphere
                46. **^** Starting from [2] Pollution – Definition from the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary
                47. **^** "Summary for Policymakers" (PDF). _Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to theFourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 5 February 2007.
                48. **^** Northon, Karen (2015-10-19). "Daily Views of Earth Available on New NASA Website". _NASA_. Retrieved  2015-10-21.
            

## External links

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Earth's
atmosphere**_.  
---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-

logo.svg/34px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) | Wikiquote has quotations related to:
_**Air**_  
---|---  
* Interactive global map of current atmospheric and ocean surface conditions.
            
                            * v
                * t
                * e
            

Earth's atmosphere

* * *
            
                            * Troposphere
                * Stratosphere
                * Mesosphere
                * Thermosphere
                * Exosphere
            
                * Tropopause
                * Stratopause
                * Mesopause
                * Thermopause / Exobase
            
                * Ozone layer
                * Turbopause
                * Ionosphere
            
                * v
                * t
                * e
            

Atmospheres

* * *

Star|

            
                            * Sun
            

|

![Toward the top of Earth's

atmosphere](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/be/Top_of_Atmosphere.jpg/76px-

Top_of_Atmosphere.jpg)

Exoplanet|

            
                            * HD 209458 b
                * Kepler-7b
            

Planet|

            
                            * Mercury
                * Venus
                * Earth
                * Mars
                * Jupiter
                * Saturn
                * Uranus
                * Neptune
            

Dwarf planet|

            
                            * Ceres
                * Pluto
                * Makemake
            

Satellite|

            
                            * Callisto
                * Dione
                * Enceladus
                * Europa
                * Ganymede
                * Io
                * Moon
                * Rhea
                * Titan
                * Triton
            

See also|

            
                            * Coma (cometary)
                * Extraterrestrial atmosphere
                * Stellar atmosphere
            
                * v
                * t
                * e
            

Elements of nature

* * *

Universe|

            
                            * Space
                * Time
                * Energy
                * Matter
                * Change
            

Earth|

            
                            * Earth science
                * History (geological)
                * Structure
                * Geology
                * Plate tectonics
                * Oceans
                * Gaia hypothesis
                * Future
            

Weather|

            
                            * Meteorology
                * Atmosphere (Earth)
                * Climate
                * Clouds
                * Sunlight
                * Tides
                * Wind
            

Natural environment|

            
                            * Ecology
                * Ecosystem
                * Field
                * Radiation
                * Wilderness
                * Wildfires
            

Life|

|

            
                            * Origin (abiogenesis)
                * Evolutionary history
                * Biosphere
                * Hierarchy
                * Biology (astrobiology)
            

* * *
            
                            * Organism
                * Eukaryota
                  * flora
                    * plants
                  * fauna
                    * animals
                  * fungi
                  * protista
                * Prokaryotes
                  * archaea
                  * bacteria
                * _Viruses_
            
                * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
            
                * v
                * t
                * e
            

Natural resources

* * *

Air|

| Pollution / quality|

            
                            * Ambient standards (USA)
                * Index
                * Indoor
                  * developing nations
                * Law
                  * Clean Air Act (USA)
                * Ozone depletion
            

---|---  
Emissions|

            
                            * Airshed
                * Trading
                * Deforestation (REDD)
            

![Carson Falls on Mount Kinabalu,

Borneo](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/57/Carson_Fall_Mt_Kinabalu.jpg/100px-

Carson_Fall_Mt_Kinabalu.jpg)

Energy|

            
                            * Law
                * Resources
                * Fossil fuels (peak oil)
                * Geothermal
                * Hydro
                  * tidal
                  * wave
                * Nuclear
                * Solar
                  * sunlight
                  * shade
                * Wind
            

Land|

            
                            * Arable
                  * peak farmland
                * Degradation
                * Law
                  * property
                * Management
                  * habitat conservation
                * Minerals
                  * mining
                    * law
                    * sand
                  * peak
                  * rights
                * Soil
                  * conservation
                  * fertility
                  * health
                  * resilience
                * Use
                  * planning
                  * reserve
            

Life|

            
                            * Biodiversity
                * Bioprospecting
                * Biosphere
                * Bushfood
                * Bushmeat
                * Fisheries
                  * law
                  * management
                * Food
                * Forests
                  * genetic resources
                  * law
                  * management
                * Game
                  * law
                * Gene bank
                * Herbalist plants
                * Marine conservation
                * Non-timber forest products
                * Rangeland
                * Seed bank
                * Wildlife
                  * conservation
                  * management
                * Wood
            

Water|

| Types / location|

            
                            * Aquifer
                  * storage and recovery
                * Drinking
                * Fresh
                * Groundwater
                  * pollution
                  * recharge
                  * remediation
                * Hydrosphere
                * Ice
                  * bergs
                  * glacial
                  * polar
                * Irrigation
                  * _huerta_
                * Rain
                  * harvesting
                * Stormwater
                * Surface water
                * Wastewater
                  * reclaimed
            

---|---  
Aspects|

            
                            * Desalination
                * Floods
                * Law
                * Leaching
                * Sanitation
                * Conflict
                * Conservation
                * Peak water
                * Pollution
                * Privatization
                * Quality
                * Right
                * Resources
                  * management
                  * policy
            

Related|

|

            
                            * Commons
                  * enclosure
                  * global
                  * land
                  * tragedy of
                * Economics
                  * ecological
                  * land
                * Ecosystem services
                * Exploitation
                  * overexploitation
                  * Earth Overshoot Day
                * Management
                  * adaptive
                * Natural capital
                  * accounting
                * Nature reserve
                * Systems ecology
                * Urban ecology
                * Wilderness
            

* * *

Resource|

            
                            * Common-pool
                * Conflict (perpetuation)
                * Curse
                * Depletion
                * Extraction
                * Nationalism
                * Renewable / Non-renewable
            
                * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal
                * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
            

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atmosphere_of_Earth&oldid=899979597"

Categories:

            
                            * Atmosphere of Earth
                * Atmospheric thermodynamics
                * Breathing gases
                * Environments
                * Climate
            

Hidden categories:

            
                            * Pages with DOIs inactive as of 2019
                * Articles with short description
                * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
                * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2016
                * Articles needing additional references from October 2013
                * All articles needing additional references
                * Portal templates with redlinked portals
                * Commons category link is on Wikidata
                * Articles containing video clips
            

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

            
                            * Not logged in
                * Talk
                * Contributions
                * Create account
                * Log in
            

### Namespaces

            
                            * Article
                * Talk
            

### Variants

### Views

            
                            * Read
                * View source
                * View history
            

### More

### Search

### Navigation

            
                            * Main page
                * Contents
                * Featured content
                * Current events
                * Random article
                * Donate to Wikipedia
                * Wikipedia store
            

### Interaction

            
                            * Help
                * About Wikipedia
                * Community portal
                * Recent changes
                * Contact page
            

### Tools

            
                            * What links here
                * Related changes
                * Upload file
                * Special pages
                * Permanent link
                * Page information
                * Wikidata item
                * Cite this page
            

### In other projects

            
                            * Wikimedia Commons
                * Wikibooks
            

### Print/export

            
                            * Create a book
                * Download as PDF
                * Printable version
            

### Languages

            
                            * Afrikaans
                * አማርኛ
                * العربية
                * Asturianu
                * Azərbaycanca
                * تۆرکجه
                * বাংলা
                * Bân-lâm-gú
                * Basa Banyumasan
                * Башҡортса
                * Беларуская
                * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
                * भोजपुरी
                * Български
                * Bosanski
                * Brezhoneg
                * Català
                * Čeština
                * Cymraeg
                * Dansk
                * Deutsch
                * Eesti
                * Ελληνικά
                * Español
                * Esperanto
                * Euskara
                * فارسی
                * Français
                * Frysk
                * Gaeilge
                * Galego
                * 한국어
                * Հայերեն
                * हिन्दी
                * Hrvatski
                * Ido
                * Bahasa Indonesia
                * Interlingua
                * Íslenska
                * Italiano
                * עברית
                * Jawa
                * ಕನ್ನಡ
                * ქართული
                * Қазақша
                * Kiswahili
                * Kreyòl ayisyen
                * Кыргызча
                * Latviešu
                * Lëtzebuergesch
                * Lietuvių
                * Македонски
                * Malagasy
                * മലയാളം
                * मराठी
                * Bahasa Melayu
                * Монгол
                * မြန်မာဘာသာ
                * Nederlands
                * Nedersaksies
                * नेपाली
                * 日本語
                * Nordfriisk
                * Norsk
                * Norsk nynorsk
                * Occitan
                * ଓଡ଼ିଆ
                * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
                * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
                * پنجابی
                * Papiamentu
                * پښتو
                * Patois
                * ភាសាខ្មែរ
                * Piemontèis
                * Polski
                * Português
                * Qaraqalpaqsha
                * Română
                * Rumantsch
                * Runa Simi
                * Русский
                * संस्कृतम्
                * Sardu
                * Scots
                * Seeltersk
                * Shqip
                * Simple English
                * سنڌي
                * Slovenčina
                * Slovenščina
                * کوردی
                * Српски / srpski
                * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
                * Basa Sunda
                * Suomi
                * Svenska
                * தமிழ்
                * Татарча/tatarça
                * తెలుగు
                * ไทย
                * Тоҷикӣ
                * Türkçe
                * Türkmençe
                * Тыва дыл
                * Українська
                * اردو
                * Tiếng Việt
                * Võro
                * West-Vlams
                * 吴语
                * ייִדיש
                * Yorùbá
                * 粵語
                * Zazaki
                * Zeêuws
                * Žemaitėška
                * 中文
            

Edit links

            
                            * This page was last edited on 2 June 2019, at 17:22 (UTC).
                * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                * Privacy policy
                * About Wikipedia
                * Disclaimers
                * Contact Wikipedia
                * Developers
                * Cookie statement
                * Mobile view
                * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
            

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

