

Coral Reef Alliance

Uniting Communities to Save Coral Reefs

DONATE

![](https://coral.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/facebook.png)
![](https://coral.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/twitter.png)
![](https://coral.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/instagram.png)
![](https://coral.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/linkedin.png)

            
                            * Coral Reefs 101
                  * Coral Reef Ecology
                  * Reef Threats
                  * Why Care About Reefs?
                  * Ask a Scientist
                * What We Do
                  * Healthy Fisheries for Reefs
                  * Clean Water for Reefs
                  * Intact Reef Ecosystems
                  * Science of Adaptation
                  * Adaptive Reefscapes
                * Where We Work
                  * Fiji
                  * Hawaiʻi
                  * Indonesia
                  * Mesoamerican Region
                * What You Can Do
                  * Take Action
                  * Share Your Passion
                  * Download Desktop Wallpaper
                  * Donate Now
                  * Volunteer
                * Ways To Give
                  * Donate Now
                  * Membership Levels
                  * Other Ways to Give
                  * Partners
                * Sign-up for E-Current
            

Home / Coral Reefs 101 / Reef Threats / Global Threats

![](https://coral.org/wp-

content/uploads/2013/07/Website_CoralThreats_Header_Global.jpg)

A panoramic image of fluorescing corals in New Caledonia; photo by The Ocean
Agency / XL Catlin Seaview Survey.

# Global Threats

###### Climate Change

The facts are clear: our world is getting warmer and our oceans are growing
more acidic. Ninety-seven percent of publishing climate scientists agree that
global climate change is real and a result of human activity. By reducing the
human use of fossil fuels, we can curb carbon dioxide emissions (CO2), slow
the pace of climate change and give coral reefs the critical time they need to
adapt.

**Coral Bleaching:** Most corals have a narrow temperature tolerance. Coral
bleaching occurs when corals become stressed, most often when ocean water gets
too warm. Corals will “eject” the symbiotic algae (called zooxanthellae) that
live inside them. When corals lose their algae, they not only lose their color
(turning white) but also their built-in food source. Scientists have declared
three global coral bleaching events: 1998, 2010 and 2014-2017. This most
recent event was the longest and most widespread bleaching event ever
recorded, killing as much as two-thirds of the corals in the northern part of
Australia’s Great Barrier Reef. Although corals can survive a bleaching event,
they will eventually die if they are under repeated stress. Outbreaks of coral
disease typically follow bleaching events since stressed corals are more
susceptible to infection. A recent special report from the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states that with an additional half-degree of
warming above today's levels, tropical coral reefs will face "very frequent
mass mortalities," although coral adaptation is possible. If temperatures rise
an additional degree to 2 degrees above pre-industrial levels, coral reefs are
in danger of vanishing entirely.

**Sea level rise:** As the planet gets warmer, glaciers melt, causing sea
level to rise. As a result, corals are predicted to end up deeper underwater,
receive less sunlight and grow more slowly. The IPCC has found that sea level
is rising at a rate of 0.12 inches per year—60 percent faster than the 0.08
inches per year that were predicted in 2007.

**Stronger storms:** Another predicted climate change impact is an increase in
the frequency and intensity of tropical storms. Hurricanes, cyclones and
typhoons gain their speed and strength from warm ocean temperatures. These
storms cause larger and more powerful waves than normal and can break coral
branches and overturn coral colonies. Compounding the problem is the fact that
heavy rainfall from a storm can cause an increase in runoff from land-based
sources, leading to increases in nutrients and sediments.

###### Ocean Acidification

Since the start of the Industrial Revolution about 150 years, ago, the amount
of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the air has increased by one-third. About 25
percent of all of the CO2 emitted is absorbed by the oceans, another 25
percent is absorbed by plants and trees, and the remaining 50 percent stays in
the atmosphere. As the oceans absorb CO2, their chemistry changes and they
become more acidic. This makes it difficult for corals and other marine
organisms to grow their skeletons and shells. The calcification rates of
corals and other reef organisms have already begun to decrease. With increased
CO2 in the water, coral may form weaker skeletons, making them more vulnerable
to disease and destruction by storms.

###### Ozone depletion

The depletion of the ozone layer is primarily the result of ozone-destroying
chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) being released into the
atmosphere. Heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide (CO2) exacerbate the
situation by creating atmospheric conditions that lead to ozone loss. When the
protective ozone is depleted, the intensity and nature of ultraviolet (UV)
radiation that reaches the earth’s surface increases. Although corals have a
natural sunscreen to protect themselves from UV radiation, at increased
levels, this radiation can damage corals in shallow waters.

            
                            * Coral Reef Ecology
                  * Coral Reef Biodiversity
                  * Coral Polyps
                  * Hard Corals
                  * Soft Corals
                  * How Reefs Are Made
                  * What Do Coral Reefs Need to Survive?
                  * Where Are Coral Reefs Located?
                  * How Coral Reefs Grow
                  * How Corals Reproduce
                  * Types of Coral Reef Formations
                * Reef Threats
                  * Global
                  * Direct
                * Why Care About Reefs?
                  * Biodiversity
                  * Coastal Protection
                  * Food
                  * Medicine
                  * Tourism
                * Ask a Scientist
            

#### SEARCH

#### About Us

            
                            * Our History
                * Our Team
                * Annual Reports and Financial Documents
                * Job Opportunities
                * Contact Information
            

#### For the Media

            
                            * Press Releases
                * Press Inquiries
            

#### Latest News

            
                            * Blog
                * Our Publications
                * CORAL in the News
                * Reefs in the News
            

© 2019 Coral Reef Alliance | 1330 Broadway, Suite 600 Oakland, CA 94612 USA |
Contact: 1.888.Coral.Reef | info@coral.org | Policies & Disclosures

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

