  
              
                            *  
                * Look up a Term Close Panel
                *  
                * CLAM Bake Close Clams
                *
            

# Climate Science Glossary

## Term Lookup

Enter a term in the search box to find its definition.

## Settings

Use the controls in the far right panel to increase or decrease the number of
terms automatically displayed (or to completely turn that feature off).

# Term Lookup

Term:

Define

# Settings

Beginner Intermediate Advanced No Definitions Definition Life: 5 seconds 10
seconds 20 seconds 30 seconds 1 minute Until closed

* * *

_All IPCC definitions taken from Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science
Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Annex I, Glossary, pp. 941-954.
Cambridge University Press._

![](images/_core/head/button_sks_200.jpg)
![](images/_core/head/button_sks2_200.jpg)

![](images/_core/head/wflag_english.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_chinese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_czech.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_croatian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_danish.gif) ![](images/_core/head/wflag_dutch.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_finnish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_french.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_german.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_israel.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_hungarian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_icelandic.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_indonesian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_italian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_japanese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_korean.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_norwegian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_polish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_portugese.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_russian.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_slovak.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_slovene.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_spanish.gif)
![](images/_core/head/wflag_swedish.gif) ![](images/_core/head/wflag_thai.gif)

* * *

Home ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) Arguments
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Software ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Resources
Comments ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)The Consensus Project
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)Translations ![](images/_core/head/p.gif)About
Donate  
![](images/_core/head/left_top_shadow.gif)

![Twitter](images/_core/head/icon_twitter.gif)
![Facebook](images/_core/head/icon_facebook.gif)
![YouTube](images/_core/head/icon_youtube.gif)
![Pinterest](images/_core/head/icon_pinterest.gif)

![RSS Posts](images/_core/head/icon_rss_posts.gif) ![RSS

Comments](images/_core/head/icon_rss_comments.gif) ![Email

Subscribe](images/_core/head/icon_email2.gif)

![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)  
![](images/_core/head/left_header.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/left_1.gif) |
Climate's changed before  
---|---  
![](images/_core/head/left_2.gif) | It's the sun  
![](images/_core/head/left_3.gif) | It's not bad  
![](images/_core/head/left_4.gif) | There is no consensus  
![](images/_core/head/left_5.gif) | It's cooling  
![](images/_core/head/left_6.gif) | Models are unreliable  
![](images/_core/head/left_7.gif) | Temp record is unreliable  
![](images/_core/head/left_8.gif) | Animals and plants can adapt  
![](images/_core/head/left_9.gif) | It hasn't warmed since 1998  
![](images/_core/head/left_10.gif) | Antarctica is gaining ice  
![](images/_core/head/left_11.gif) | View All Arguments...  
![](images/_core/head/left_therm_bottom.gif)  
![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)

![](images/_core/left_margin/IPCC_88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/rcp_icon.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/theConsensusProject_88.png)
![](images/_core/left_margin/trend_button_88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/pp88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/Predictions_88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/button_oanotok_88.jpg)
![](images/_core/left_margin/climate_myths88.jpg)

![](images/_core/left_margin/button_history.gif)
![](images/_core/left_margin/button_misinformers_88.gif)

![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)  
Username| |  
---|---|---  
Password| |  
Keep me logged in  
| | New? Register here  
Forgot your password?  
![](images/_core/head/left_divider.gif)

## Latest Posts

            
                            * State of the climate: Heat across Earth’s surface and oceans mark early 2019
                * Climate Change vs Cosmological Catastrophe
                * Effects of Global Warming
                * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #22
                * Humans and volcanoes caused nearly all of global heating in past 140 years
                * Four scientists make creativity a key to communicating their research
                * Beleaguered journalism interests seek to aid ailing planet
                * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #21
                * New research, May 13-19, 2019
                * Introducing a new citizens initiative for carbon pricing in Europe
                * Deep sea carbon reservoirs once superheated the Earth – could it happen again?
                * Climate Adam reacts to Bill Nye: "The planet's on f@*&ing; fire!"
                * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #20
                * New research, May 6-12, 2019
                * IPCC Updates Methodology for Greenhouse Gas Inventories
                * Inspiring, not depressing, film fest messages
                * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #19
                * New research, April 29 - May 5, 2019
                * Fox News made the US a hotbed of climate denial. Kids are the cure.
                * State of the climate: Heat across Earth’s surface and oceans mark early 2019
                * Nature’s Dangerous Decline ‘Unprecedented’; Species Extinction Rates ‘Accelerating’
                * Former climate 'denier' regrets 'how wrongheaded but certain I was'
                * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming Digest #18
                * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #18
                * New research, April 22-28, 2019
                * What's Earth's ideal temperature?
                * Climate change could cost the U.S. economy hundreds of billions a year by 2090
                * Rebellious Times
                * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming Digest #17
                * 2019 SkS Weekly Climate Change & Global Warming News Roundup #17
            

Archives

Climate Hustle

![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif)

![](images/_core/flags/flag_finnish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_spanish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_german.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_swedish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_polish.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_portugese.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_japanese.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_french.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_dutch.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_russian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_italian.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_slovak.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_israel.gif)![](images/_core/flags/flag_slovene.gif)

# What were climate scientists predicting in the 1970s?

Link to this page

## What the science says...

| Select a level...| ![](images/_core/other/level1.gif) **Basic** | |
![](images/_core/other/level2.gif) Intermediate | |  
---|---|---|---|---|--- 

The vast majority of climate papers in the 1970s predicted warming.

## Climate Myth...

Ice age predicted in the 70s  
"[M]any publications now claiming the world is on the brink of a global
warming disaster said the same about an impending ice age - just 30 years ago.
Several major ones, including The New York Times, Time magazine and Newsweek,
have reported on three or even four different climate shifts since 1895."
(Fire and Ice)

In the thirty years leading up to the 1970s, available temperature recordings
suggested that there was a cooling trend. As a result some scientists
suggested that the current inter-glacial period could rapidly draw to a close,
which might result in the Earth plunging into a new ice age over the next few
centuries. This idea could have been reinforced by the knowledge that the smog
that climatologists call 'aerosols' - emitted by human activities into the
atmosphere - also caused cooling. In fact, as temperature recording has
improved in coverage, it's become apparent that the cooling trend was most
pronounced in northern land areas and that global temperature trends were in
fact relatively steady during the period prior to 1970.

At the same time as some scientists were suggesting we might be facing another
ice age, a greater number published contradicting studies. Their papers showed
that the growing amount of greenhouse gasses that humans were putting into the
atmosphere would cause much greater warming - warming that would exert a much
greater influence on global temperature than any possible natural or human-
caused cooling effects.

By 1980 the predictions about ice ages had ceased, due to the overwhelming
evidence contained in an increasing number of reports that warned of global
warming. Unfortunately, the small number of predictions of an ice age appeared
to be much more interesting than those of global warming, so it was those
sensational 'Ice Age' stories in the press that so many people tend to
remember.

![](https://skepticalscience.com/pics/GlobalCooling.JPG)

The fact is that around 1970 there were 6 times as many scientists predicting
a warming rather than a cooling planet. Today, with 30+years more data to
analyse, we've reached a clear scientific consensus: 97% of working climate
scientists agree with the view that human beings are causing global warming.

Basic rebuttal written by John Russell

* * *

**Update July 2015** :

Here is a related lecture-video from Denial101x - Making Sense of Climate
Science Denial

Last updated on 5 July 2015 by pattimer. View Archives

Printable Version | Offline PDF Version | Link to this page

## Further reading

            
                            * The Myth of the 1970's Global Cooling Scientific Consensus, published by the American Meteorological Society.
                * Was an imminent Ice Age predicted in the '70's? by William Connelly documents all the scientific literature in the 70's on global cooling.
                * Past Cycles: Ice Age Speculations by Spencer Weart (part of the _History of Global Warming_ series) documents the development of ice age science.
                * Logical Science goes to the trouble of purchasing the 1975 National Academy of Sciences report to see what the NAS had to say about global cooling in the 70's.
                * James Hansen responds to the claims that "Hansen predicted an ice age in the 70's", explaining the role of his computer program used in Rasool's paper.
                * Check out this _New York Times_ article from 1956 that discusses a forecasted increase in global temperatures as emissions from burning fossil fuels increase atmospheric CO2. Thanks to George Morrison for the heads up.
                * Robert Brulle at the Wonk Room looks at a range of _New York Times_ articles on climate science in the late 60's and early 70's.
                * The 1979 report from the National Academy of Sciences, "Carbon Dioxide and Climate: A Scientific Assessment" finds "when it is assumed that the CO2 content of the atmosphere is doubled and statistical thermal equilibrium is achieved, the more realistic of the modeling efforts predict a global surface warming of between 2°C and 3.5°C, with greater increases at high latitudes."
            

## Further viewing

"In the 70s, They said there'd be an Ice Age" from Climate Denial Crock of the
Week.

## Comments

1 2 Next

Comments 1 to 50 out of 68:

            
                            1. **GMB** at 12:07 PM on 28 December, 2007
            

But the idea that we will go into another glaciation is far sounder science
than is this new and basically baseless stuff. We always have in the past.
This planet is currently hard-wired with a one way catastrophic cooling bias.

The case that we will have another glaciation is basically cut and dried. We
have the capacity to cool the earth. We have no such capacity to warm the
earth. In order to avoid another glaciation we ought to be looking at ways to
hose down volcanic aerosols or something.

Certainly we need to build up our nuclear energy production capacity. And our
hydrocarbons as well.

            
                            2. **cce** at 19:37 PM on 3 January, 2008
            

Ice ages cannot be explained without the GHG feedback. The same science that
tells us this, tells us we are heating up the planet.

            
                            3. **PaulM** at 01:07 AM on 29 February, 2008
            

The claim by Peterson that there were only 7 papers in the 1970s predicting
cooling is just ridiculous. Anyone can check this with a quick look at Google
scholar. Here are two examples they have missed, but there are many more.

Return of the ice age and drought in peninsular Florida?  
Joseph M. Moran, Geology 3 (12): 695-696 (1975)  
Convection in the Antarctic Ice Sheet Leading to a Surge of the Ice Sheet and
Possibly to a New Ice Age  
T. Hughes, Science Vol. 170. no. 3958, pp. 630 - 633 (1970)

What is strange is why people attempt to re-write recent history in this way,
when their claims can so easily be disproven.  
Where did all the stories in the papers, TV and magazines come from? Were they
all just fabricated? No of course not, they came from scientists who made
suggestions (like the above 'possibly to a new ice age') which were then hyped
and exaggerated by the media. Much the same thing is happening now with the
global warming scare.

            
                            4. **frankbi** at 05:39 AM on 29 March, 2008
            

Um, for one thing Moran was writing about _Florida_ cooling, not _global_
cooling. I guess you'll need to relax your search criterion for "global
cooling" a whole lot to prove that scientists did predict cooling...

"they came from scientists who made suggestions (like the above 'possibly to a
new ice age') which were then hyped and exaggerated by the media. Much the
same thing is happening now with the global warming scare."

Yeah, "much of the same thing" in the sense that the "media" is artificially
inflating the voice of the global warming "skeptics".

            
                            5. **Quietman** at 08:25 AM on 20 April, 2008
            

frankbi  
Read the media articles, they are almost always alarmist. Those that have
comment sections often disappear after someone disproves the article. I have
seen this on CBS, ABC and LiveScience quite a few times.  
Then there is the BBC.

            
                            6. **ScaredAmoeba** at 21:26 PM on 20 April, 2008
            

PaulM,  
You bemoan people attempting to [quote]‘re-write recent history’. However,
reporting the facts does not amount to ‘rewriting history’!  
The people actually responsible for the rewriting of history are not AGW
fanatics, but people politically or ideologically aligned to industry and
typically funded directly or indirectly by the fossil fuel funded denial
industry. Peterson et al. 2008 have merely attempted to establish the facts
and set the record straight.

The fact that you may have identified two additional relevant papers and
claimed there are ‘many more’, which may or may not support your pet theory,
does not invalidate their research. It seems probable that any additional
papers fitting the various search criteria will be distributed in much the
same way as the papers already listed, unless there is a very good reason why
they should not be included.

            
                            7. **ScaredAmoeba** at 22:16 PM on 20 April, 2008
            

Quietman  
You are repeating the deceitful alarmist allegations made repeatedly by
skeptics

From Scientists add to heat over global warming by S. Fred Singer  
Washington Times, May 5, 1998  
“But this exaggerated concern about global warming contrasts sharply with an
earlier NAS/NRC report, "Understanding Climate Change: A Program for Action."
There, in 1975, the NAS "experts" exhibited the same hysterical fears—-this
time, however, asserting a "finite possibility that a serious worldwide
cooling could befall the Earth within the next 100 years."

The 1975 NAS panel claimed to have good reason for their fears: Global
temperatures had been in steady decline since the 1940s. They considered the
preceding period of warming, between 1860 and 1940, as "unusual," following as
it did the "Little Ice Age," which had lasted from 1430 to 1850.”

http://www.sepp.org/key%20issues/glwarm/sciaddheat.html

You will note that the terms ‘exaggerated’, ‘hysterical fears’ and ‘fears’ are
used. There are a number of other changes too that render the use of quotes
highly questionable.

1975 US National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council Report  
UNDERSTANDING CLIMATE CHANGE: A program for action

Strangely,

From the foreword (by V E Suomi, Chair of the US Committee for GARP):

"..,we do not have a good quantitative understanding of our climate machine
and what determines its course. Without the fundamental understanding, **it
does not seem possible to predict climate**..,".

From the introduction  
"Climatic change has been a subject of intellectual interest for many years.
However, there are now more compelling reasons for its study: the growing
awareness that **our economic and social stability is profoundly influenced by
climate and that man's activities themselves may be capable of influencing the
climate in possibly undesirable ways**. The climates of the earth have always
been changing, and they will doubtless continue to do so in the future. **How
large these future changes will be, and where and how rapidly they will occur,
we do not know** ".

Not much evidence of hysteria! It would seem that the allegations of
exaggeration and hysteria were complete fabrications introduced by Singer. The
measured and cautious language of the National Academy of Sciences has been
entirely born out.

            
                            8. **Quietman** at 06:08 AM on 24 April, 2008
            

Re: "You are repeating the deceitful alarmist allegations made repeatedly by
skeptics"  
No, I am not repeating anything. My statement is purely from personal
experience. I tried again this morining, after reading your reply, to go back
and see if some of the alarmist articles were still there. Most were gone. I
checked back through January - gone. What few skeptical articles I had read
are still there. I may be ignorant about many subjects but I am not stupid.
Those articles were intentionally pulled when proven incorrect. Here are the
few that have not been deleted:

The rhetoric of climate and slavery

Climate change 2007 - a year in review

Trees absorbing less CO2 as world warms, study finds

Acidic seas may kill 98% of world's reefs by 2050

Deniers of global warming harm us

Global warming to trigger volcanic eruptions

            
                            9. **Quietman** at 07:20 AM on 24 April, 2008
            

These articles all present a case for either natural warming or non-CO2 forced
AGW, or simply that the alarmist claims don't quite cut it.

Water Vapor Feedback Is Rapidly Warming Europe

About the coral reefs: Coral Reefs May Be More Resilient Than Expected

"The deniers' fallback position is to argue that what is happening is due not
to human intervention but some sort of natural cycle." During the last
centuries human methane emissions artificially increased CH4 concentrations to
approximately 1750 ppbv:  
Current Spike In Atmospheric Methane Mirrors Early Climate Change Events  
NASA Studies How Airborne Particles Affect Climate Change

"Tropical deforestation currently accounts for roughly one-fifth of the global
emissions of carbon dioxide, the most important human-derived greenhouse gas,
Gurney said."  
Researchers Propose Way To Incorporate Deforestation Into Climate Change
Treaty

"Whilst rising air temperatures are believed to be the primary cause of recent
dramatic disintegration of ice shelves like Larsen B, the new study suggests
that the ocean may play a more significant role in destroying them than
previously thought."  
Antarctic Ice Shelf Retreats Happened Before  
Antarctic Deep Sea Gets Colder

My point being that healthy skepticism leads to better understanding of the
big picture.

**Response:** I'll leave this comment up as there are few links there I wasn't
previously aware of. But from now on, I'm taking a zero tolerance policy on
comments that post a bunch of links not related to the topic. I know its a bit
more work but please post any links on the relevant page.

            
                            10. **Quietman** at 11:31 AM on 24 April, 2008
            

Sorry John  
I was replying to ScaredAmoeba "You are repeating the deceitful alarmist
allegations made repeatedly by skeptics" Attempting to show that not all
skeptical arguments are denials or harmful. If you prefer to delete it thats
OK by me, it's your blog.

**Response:** Nah, I'll leave it up. One of my pet peeves when having online
discussion about global warming is when someone just posts a whole bunch of
diverse links to a wide range of topics - it essentially shuts down the
discussion because it's not practical to post a reply addressing each link.
More constructive debate keeps to the topic at hand. I don't think you were
necessarily trying to do this but for future reference, those links would be
more effective posted on the appropriate page. Plus from my point of view as
webmaster, I like the comments section to be relevant and useful to readers.

            
                            11. **Quietman** at 08:17 AM on 31 August, 2008
            

The side argument over deceit aside, I would like to point out that the
scientist who started the cooling fright in the 70s actually has not changed
his position.  
Reading his work indicates that there should be an upcoming glacation
regardless of any warming but the timing was and still is unknown. The panic
was caused by the media reading timing as immediate into his work.

            
                            12. **chris** at 05:26 AM on 23 October, 2008
            

Re #3:

It's easy to be misled by the titles of papers. The examples you've asserted
as supporting a 1970's perspective of global cooling don't actually do so.

Your second article sounds like it does:

Convection in the Antarctic Ice Sheet Leading to a Surge of the Ice Sheet and
Possibly to a New Ice Age  
T. Hughes, Science Vol. 170. no. 3958, pp. 630 - 633 (1970)

But it's just a potentially misleadingly worded title. If you read the paper
it's got zero relevance to a possibility of a "new ice age" in the near (i.e.
"near" from a 1970 perspective). It's about the GENERAL nature of ice
Antarctic ice sheet advance that might (within a particular "surge" theory) be
linked to the glacial cycles within the Pleistocene. So it's about how glacial
periods might in general occur.

That's very clear from reading the paper. It's also evident just from reading
the abstract:

abstract: "The Antarctic surge theory of Pleistocene glaciation is reexamined
in the context of thermal convection theory applied to the Antarctic ice
sheet. The ice sheet surges when a water layer at the base of the ice sheet
reaches the edge of the ice sheet over broad fronts and has a thickness
sufficient to drown the projections from the bed that most strongly hinder
basal ice flow. Frictional heat from convection flow promotes basal melting,
and, as the ice sheet grows to the continental shelf of Antarctica, a surge of
the ice sheet appears likely."

So it's a theoretical study of a mechanism for ice sheet advance during
glacial cycles. It doesn't address the possibility of any such event during
the current Holocene, and has nothing to do with 1970's scientific perception
of global warming or cooling or any such thing.

Likewise it's understandable why Peterson et al. didn't include your other
paper as a "cooling"/Ice Age" one:

Return of the ice age and drought in peninsular Florida?  
Joseph M. Moran, Geology 3 (12): 695-696 (1975)

Although the title (and the rather odd abstract) might suggest that the paper
is about the "return of the ice age", the question mark highlights the fact
that the author is rather equivocal over such a conclusion.

Here's how he ends his (very brief) note:

"While there is an interesting parallel between recent and late-glacial events
in the tropics, no clear cause-effect relation has been established between
the current hemispheric cooling trend and precipitation trend in peninsular
Florida. Also, even if a linkage were established, there is no certainty that
the hemispheric cooling trend will not reverse itself in a few years. Rather
than portraying a bleak future for Florida’s water supply, therefore, the
observations presented here should serve as stimuli for further monitoring and
research to promote understanding of the controlling atmospheric phenomena."

In other words, the paper relates to precipitation trends with potential
implications for water supply in Florida, and the author indicates that there
isn't any necessary relation between cooling and precipitation trends and
indicates anyway that the cooling trend might reverse itself.

So neither of your suggestions - absolutely not the first one which is totally
irrelevant to 1970's perspective on cooling/warming or otherwise, - nor the
second one can be taken to support the notion of any 1970's scientific
perception of global cooling (by the criterion that Paterson et al. set of a
paper with a clear projection of climate change or discussing an aspect of
climate forcing relevant to time scales of decades or centuries). Morgan's
short note doesn't come to any conclusion - the "cooling" "...might reverse
itself in a few years".

            
                            13. **Steve L** at 15:07 PM on 17 May, 2009
            

I was struck by this week's skeptic article (by David Deming in "The American
Thinker"), [http://skepticalscience.com/article.php?a=2327] finding it both
laughable and inspiring, and it drew me back to here. One thing that surprised
me a bit was Deming's claim that we don't know what causes ice ages. I thought
it was Milankovitch cycles mostly (Deming says Ike Winograd disproved that).
With the google I only found a Wunsch abstract [http://tinyurl.com/qg3bgw]
that says orbital changes only explain 20% of the variance in climate records
studies. Anyway, I'm curious to learn more about our understanding of ice
ages.

            
                            14. **MattJ** at 06:09 AM on 20 August, 2010
            

GMG #1:

You SAY it is 'sounder science', but you ignore all the evidence to the
contrary presented in this article and many others on this site.

No, belief in impending glaciation is NOT 'sounder science'. Nor is it
"sounder science" to argue as you do, that it has always happened that way.

On the contrary: the SOUND science recognizes that things are no longer going
to happen "as they always have happened". Now we really have made a large
enough change to break the age-old pattern -- for the worse.

            
                            15. **MattJ** at 06:23 AM on 20 August, 2010
            

This Basic Version is one of the better ones written so far. It has much
better flow as we read it. One idea logically follows after the other, leading
naturally to a sound conclusion.

Well and good: but you knew there was a 'but' coming, didn't you;)? That 'but'
is: "but the sentences are too long for our target audience".

To remedy this, I suggest some strategic application of metonymy, synecdoche
and ellipsis to tighten things up.

So, for example, we can do much better than "As a result some scientists
suggested that the current inter-glacial period could rapidly draw to a close,
which might result in the Earth plunging into a new ice age over the next few
centuries."

We can instead, say "So some scientists suggested that the current inter-
glacial could draw to a rapid close, starting a new ice age over the next few
centuries". (we really don't need to specify that it is the Earth we are
talking about).

Similarly, "This idea could have been reinforced by the knowledge that the
smog that climatologists call ‘aerosols’ – emitted by human activities into
the atmosphere – also caused cooling." can also be improved by replacing with:

"About the same time, climatologist learned that 'aerosols' (small particles
resulting from human activities) can cause cooling. This may have have
encouraged the idea that a new ice age was coming".

One final note: here in the States at least, we use "it's" as a contraction
for "it is". We never use it for "it has". I don't know about the state of the
language Down Under, but if the target audience is here in the US, the use of
"it's" to mean "it has" will sound strange to too many in your target
audience.

            
                            16. **cjshaker** at 05:42 AM on 2 December, 2010
            

If you want to read the Shackleton paper yourself, instead of taking what
William Connelly says at face value, you can read the abstract here:

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17790893

"Science. 1976 Dec 10;194(4270):1121-32.  
Variations in the Earth's Orbit: Pacemaker of the Ice Ages.  
Hays JD, Imbrie J, Shackleton NJ.

Abstract  
1) Three indices of global climate have been monitored in the record of the
past 450,000 years in Southern Hemisphere ocean-floor sediments. 2) Over the
frequency range 10(-4) to 10(-5) cycle per year, climatic variance of these
records is concentrated in three discrete spectral peaks at periods of 23,000,
42,000, and approximately 100,000 years. These peaks correspond to the
dominant periods of the earth's solar orbit, and contain respectively about
10, 25, and 50 percent of the climatic variance. 3) The 42,000-year climatic
component has the same period as variations in the obliquity of the earth's
axis and retains a constant phase relationship with it. 4) The 23,000-year
portion of the variance displays the same periods (about 23,000 and 19,000
years) as the quasi-periodic precession index. 5) The dominant, 100,000-year
climatic [See table in the PDF file] component has an average period close to,
and is in phase with, orbital eccentricity. Unlike the correlations between
climate and the higher-frequency orbital variations (which can be explained on
the assumption that the climate system responds linearly to orbital forcing),
an explanation of the correlation between climate and eccentricity probably
requires an assumption of nonlinearity. 6) It is concluded that changes in the
earth's orbital geometry are the fundamental cause of the succession of
Quaternary ice ages. 7) A model of future climate based on the observed
orbital-climate relationships, but ignoring anthropogenic effects, predicts
that the long-term trend over the next sevem thousand years is toward
extensive Northern Hemisphere glaciation.

PMID: 17790893 [PubMed]

LinkOut - more resources  
"

            
                            17. **JMurphy** at 09:33 AM on 2 December, 2010
            

**cjshaker** , number 7 in your list states :

_A model of future climate based on the observed orbital-climate
relationships, but ignoring anthropogenic effects, predicts that the long-term
trend over the next sevem thousand years is toward extensive Northern
Hemisphere glaciation._

Does William Connelly interpret this paper a different way ?

            
                            18. **Berényi Péter** at 23:06 PM on 12 December, 2010
            

_**Did scientists predict an impending ice age in the 1970s?**_

It was most certainly _communicated_ they did.

            
                            19. **Bibliovermis** at 02:39 AM on 13 December, 2010
            

By whom?

Popular daily newspapers & weeky magazines, e.g. Newsweek, are not reliable
communicators of the accumulated scientific knowledge.

            
                            20. **Daniel Bailey** at 02:57 AM on 13 December, 2010
            

_**"In Search Of"**_? Seriously?

(-chuckles aloud-)

BP, you missed your calling in life.

(Guilty pleasures admission: the episodes on Mars dying from climate change
[Season 1, Episode 9] and on the search for Atlantis [Season 1, Episode 10]
are my favorites)

For all you Leonard Nimoy fans (and you know who you are):

Thanks for the chuckle,

The Yooper

            
                            21. **thepoodlebites** at 23:44 PM on 7 January, 2011
            

I guess this is the correct thread to post my anecdotal evidence. I am really
shocked by the display of revisionist history in the "What the science says"
section. I have a BS in meteorology, 1979-1982. Some of the classes included
physical meteorology, planetary atmospheres, air pollution, taught by both
American (one at NASA) and European professors. We were taught that the Earth
was in the last phase of an inter-glacial period and through a process called
instantaneous glaciation, we could plunge into another ice-age within a few
hundred years. We were taught that the runaway greenhouse effect occurred on
Venus because the atmosphere never reached saturation vapor pressure and
eventually all of the water boiled off into space. Here on Earth we were
lucky, water condensed out to form the oceans, stabilizing the climate.
Nothing about Anthropogenic Global Warming (AGW) being a threat, sorry, I
wasn't taught that. I asked a colleague this morning what he was taught in the
70's and he said the same thing, global cooling.

In 1981 I had chance to take a summer class with Dr. James Hansen in planetary
atmospheres but didn’t get in, made first alternate. Maybe Dr. Hansen would
have introduced me to the concept of AGW but since I could not attend I can’t
tell you what he taught in that summer class.

            
                            22. **Alec Cowan** at 00:36 AM on 8 January, 2011
            

@thepoodlebites #21

In order it to be complete anecdotal evidence, could you tell the name of the
institution you did study at? name of some professors and/or heads of
department? name of a couple of books you may have used in the subjects you
named, and still keep in your bookshelves? and succinctly what did you do with
your degree in meteorology (professionally speaking)?

If you want, I can explain why is this very important. Thanks in advance.

            
                            23. **muoncounter** at 00:49 AM on 8 January, 2011
            

# 21: "Nothing about Anthropogenic Global Warming (AGW) being a threat, sorry,

I wasn't taught that."

Perhaps your university, like many, suffered from a conservative bias among
faculty. Some university geology departments taught 'continental foundering'
for years as evidence for plate tectonics piled up. That doesn't prove
anything about the current state of the science.

But the signs were there: Hansen published a paper on warming in 1981; the
predictions reflected the early nature of the science, but they were
substantially correct.

See also this article with links to earlier publications and a link to a video
from 1989.

            
                            24. **snowhare** at 00:59 AM on 8 January, 2011
            

@21 thepoolbites:

You've introduced a term I had never heard of before, "instantaneous
glaciation", which seemed odd. If you search Google for it there are only 179
matches - two of which are actually links to your usage here. If you search
Google Scholar you find only 15 matches, if you search Google Ngrams, it
doesn't appear at all.

The term is, for all practical intents and purposes, not used. I suspect you
are mis-remembering a 30 year old class.

Next, the assertion made in this article is that the majority of predictions
in the 1970s were for warming, not cooling. That is not a question that an
anecdote can answer. The writer demonstrated his thesis - the vast majority of
papers in the field from the mid-1960s through the 1970s predicted that
warming, not cooling, was in our future.

Three to four decades later, it is clear they were absolutely correct.

            
                            25. **Alec Cowan** at 01:20 AM on 8 January, 2011
            

Maybe first we could wait until **thepoodlebites #21** provides more
information.

By the way, **thepoodlebites** , were your colleague taught in the same
institution? the same grade? can you ask him/her?

Not that I think that muoncounter's and snowhare's comments are nothing but
excellent, but I think that the first comment would be better once
thepoodlebites provide basic information, and the second one is excellent once
no information is provided.

We have to consider that the success of **skepticalscience.com** -10% more
visitors each month- is going to drive more people of every kind and with that
in mind it would be not advisable to engage in debates when incomplete
information is provided without first ask the commenter to provide whatever in
good faith he or she may have considered unnecessary.

            
                            26. **Ned** at 05:26 AM on 8 January, 2011
            

My favorite early paper on climate change is Wally Broecker's 1975 paper in
the journal _Science_ :

Broecker, W. 1975. Climatic change: are we on the brink of a pronounced global
warming? _Science_ , 189-460-463.

It's discussed in some detail at RealClimate ("Happy 35th birthday, global
warming!").

Kind of neat that even back in 1975, Wally B. was using both "climat[ic]
change" and "global warming" more or less interchangeably ... even in the very
title of this paper.

Also, amazingly prescient of Wally, considering that 1975 is more or less when
global temperatures came out of a lull and began rising steadily.

            
                            27. **les** at 07:37 AM on 8 January, 2011
            

24 snowhare

Volcanic triggering of glaciation says

"AN instantaneous glaciation model for the formation of the large Pleistocene
ice sheets..."

so maybe the poodle has a case?

The abstract then says...

"I suggest here that such a survival could have resulted from one or **several
closely spaced massive volcanic ash eruptions**."  
or maybe the poodle is being highly selective in his interpretation of the
relevance of this.

People really shouldn't go round destroying their own credibility that way,
especially when they've spent that much time building it up.

            
                            28. **thepoodlebites** at 01:50 AM on 12 January, 2011
            

I've tried to post replies but my posts are being pulled. What's the point of
continuing the discussion when only one side is being represented? The posts
concening my college experiences is true. Why do you question my veracity and
censor my replies?

**Response:** [Daniel Bailey] I see only one deleted comment. That comment was
deleted as it contained an inflammatory comment about another poster here on
Skeptical Science. Keep the dialogue on the science and on the subject matter
of the post (being off-topic is a prime reason comments get pulled) and all
will be well.

            
                            29. **thepoodlebites** at 02:31 AM on 12 January, 2011
            

muoncounter, Re:PDO; "So you are claiming that correlation requires causality?
Did you run that past the denial establishment to see if they reached a
consensus on that?" Is this post not inflammatory? Shouldn't all inflammatory
comments be pulled? Some comments are more inflammatory than others I suppose.

            
                            30. **rayinkorea** at 22:52 PM on 8 February, 2011
            

...so we still wait for the name of the elusive institution of learning
thepoodle went to ?  
I was a science major (starting in 1977) at the University of South Florida...
(Tampa and St. Pete campuses) and we were learning about global warming in 3
of my classes I remember .. Ecology and both Biological and Geological
Foundations of Oceanography ... talking about the physics and looking at the
CO2 level data from Mona Loa and some temperature prediction models (which
turned out to be remarkably accrate, I might add)  
It was even mentioned in my high school Biology class in 1975 (Kaiserslautern
American High School, Germany)  
I don't remember anything about global cooling except a few referrals to media
coverage ....

            
                            31. **lenarends** at 05:50 AM on 26 February, 2011
            

At the intermediate level, this is the final sentence in the caption for Fig.
1 ... "In no year were there more cooling papers than warming papers."

Yet it appears in that very chart that there were more cooling than warming
papers in 1971 (2 vs. 1).

Am I misinterpreting either the chart or the assertion in the caption?

The basic premise remains solid that climate papers in the period leaned
heavily towards suspected warming, but it's best to correct overreach, before
the "doubt mongers" use your own words against you.

            
                            32. **thepoodlebites** at 22:58 PM on 3 March, 2011
            

Climate Depot's Factsheet on 1970s Coming 'Ice Age' Claims. I think that your
10% predicted cooling statistics need revision. It's a tad low don't ya think?
These '70's papers were consistent with the global cooling theme that I was
taught while taking college meteorology classes in 1980-1982.

            
                            33. **Bibliovermis** at 00:09 AM on 4 March, 2011
            

Why even mention Newsweek when claiming to focus on peer-reviewed scientific
research? They lost my respect by using that as the opening argument.

            
                            34. **Bibliovermis** at 00:26 AM on 4 March, 2011
            

I decide to give them a second chance and push on past the Newsweek reference,
and then past the Washington Times, New York Times, and Times Magazine
references to find the 1975 NAS report on "Understanding Climate Change". That
report did not make any predictions and the coming ice age discussed was
several millenia out based on orbital parameter variation.

            
                            35. **thepoodlebites** at 00:47 AM on 4 March, 2011
            

# 34 I'm just starting to review some of the relevant articles, W.S. Harley

(1979) concludes "evidence of a change to a cooler regime has been found in
the East Asia areas in each season except winter, in the Eastern North
American area in winter, and in the Central Atlantic area in the spring and
summer." And "no evidence of climatic warming is found."

**Response:** [Dikran Marsupial] s/relevent/relevant/g

            
                            36. **JMurphy** at 03:43 AM on 4 March, 2011
            

That Climate Depot 'Factsheet' is a nonsense.  
There are links to newspapers, blogs and books (many repeated or referenced
more than once); broken links to the US Senate; and the use of the usual
suspects, i.e. IceCap, JohnDaly and Inhofe, as well as such charming sites as
AlGoreLied and PeopleForGlobalWarming.  
The only properly sourced links (three of them at the end) are :

A broken one to AMS.

One to an AMS paper (which does work) which states :

_If the actual ratio a/b of most tropospheric aerosols is of order unity, as
inferred by previous authors, then the dominant effect of such aerosols is
warming except over deserts and urban arms where the effect is somewhat
marginal between warming and cooling._  
(WHERE a/b is "the ratio of absorption a to backscatter b of incoming solar
radiation by the aerosol")  
_Suggestions by several previous authors to the effect that the apparent
worldwide cooling of climate in recent decades is attributable to large-scale
increases of particulate pollution of the atmosphere by human activities are
not supported by this analysis._

The third link is to a book by Siegfried Fred Singer (!), which goes to a
paper by J. Murray Mitchell Jr of NOAA, but which cannot be viewed in its
entirety.  
However, the abstract states :

_A 32% increase of atmospheric CO2 over 1850 levels is predicted by 2000,
causing an estimated 0.6 deg C increase in the global equilibrium temperature.
This warming effect may be offset to a certain extent by cooling due to
anthropogenic particle loading; in addition, CO2 input is expected to decrease
as the consumption of fossil fuels decreases. It is observed that, although
there is substantial evidence of global climate trends in the last century,
such variations have occurred in the past as the result of natural processes._

But even the portion of it that can be viewed from Singer's book states that
CO2 is the dominant effect, which could have greater effects in the future,
thereby causing warming. And it suggests volcanic ash as the explanation for
the cooling from the 1940s.

If all of that is proof of a 70s 'Coming Ice Age' claim, it is very poor.

            
                            37. **scaddenp** at 08:03 AM on 4 March, 2011
            

thepoodlebites - I prefer my opinions to based on reliable data dont you?

            
                            38. **thepoodlebites** at 03:34 AM on 5 March, 2011
            

# 37 I find myself at a disadvantage here. If I answer your question my post

most likely will be deleted, evaluated as an off-topic opinion. I'm finding
the Climate Depot's link a valuable resource. I cited one peer-reviewed paper
that supports my argument and I can cite many others, here. I will provide
more links if this post is not deleted. Richard Feynman's first principle of
scientific integrity states "you must not fool yourself, and you are the
easiest person to fool. After you have not fooled yourself, it's easy not to
fool other scientists." This first principle should be applied to everybody in
equal proportion.

            
                            39. **JMurphy** at 04:32 AM on 5 March, 2011
            

**thepoodlebites** , it is difficult to know what argument you are trying to
support, especially as the first paper you linked to (W.S.Harley) also stated
: _"Thirty years of data are found of insufficient length to determine whether
the cooling constitutes a climatic change under the given criteria"_ ;  
and the second one (Barry Et al) concludes the introduction with : _"The
evident sensitivity of this area to climatic fluctuations on both short and
long time scales makes it a rewarding area for interdisciplinary environmental
studies"_.

Is any of that evidence of anything you are trying to prove ?

            
                            40. **scaddenp** at 06:08 AM on 5 March, 2011
            

thepoodlebites - the question is whether the scientific consensus was that
planet was cooling. You can find papers noting long term negative turn in
solar forcing, and plenty on aerosol cooling but also considerable concern
about warming. Was there a consensus like there is on AGW now? Was there even
a slim majority worried about cooling? You can only answer those questions of
with systematic survey of scientific literature, not picking papers.(eg
Peterson)

As for Climate Depot - how many examples of misinformation would we have to
show you before you abandoned it? 5, 10, 100, every post, - or never so long
as it says things you want to hear. (ie is it worth our time trying?)

            
                            41. **thepoodlebites** at 06:47 AM on 5 March, 2011
            

# 39 Your Barry et al. link is broken. Read just before the sentence you

quoted, "the summer cooling is apparently widespread through the Canadian
Arctic so that a larger scale control must be sought." A thorough scientist
will recommend the need for further study when a cause for the observed trend
can not be conclusively determined.

            
                            42. **Lars Bergestrom** at 18:38 PM on 6 June, 2011
            

The Ice Age is not over and we are still in an Ice Age climate. Ice Age
conditions first appeared on the Earth about 45 million years ago with the
appearance of permanent ice sheets in Antarctica. The other feature of this
ice age climate was the sharp drop in the concentration of CO2 which dropped
from several thousand ppm 50 million years ago to levels as low 150-250 ppm as
recently as 3 million years ago. Today we have a CO2 level of 380 ppm and most
of Antarctica and Greenland are still covered with ice. The great ice sheets
have at their maximum reached as far south as 40 deg latitude. Burying much of
North America, Europe and Siberia. How do we know all this? 100,000s of ocean
core samples collected since the Second World War when studies of the oceans
and atmosphere became a priority for the US military. In addition to
establishing our world's paleoclimate it also proved that the continents move
on giant rocky plates. The message I take from this is that life on Earth can
globalize and cope with a great range of climate and has survived worse
climate upsets like those 65 and 250 million years ago. It will be a different
place and there is no guarantee man will flourish in such a brave new world.
Much of the flora and fauna didn't pass muster 65 and 250 million years ago.

**Response:**

[DB] You may be interested in this, then:

Carbon Release to Atmosphere 10 Times Faster Than in the Past, Geologists Find

A blog post exploring this is planned.

            
                            43. **cjshaker** at 19:48 PM on 23 October, 2011
            

Found a much more recent paper, which is talking about a return to ice age
conditions in the near future

From the summary, published in 2000:  
"The solar-output model allows speculation on global climatic variations in
the next 10,000 years. Extrapolation of the solar-output model shows a return
to little-ice-age conditions by A.D. 2400–2900 followed by a rapid return to
altithermal conditions during the middle of the third millennium A.D. This
altithermal period may be similar to the Holocene Maximum that began nearly
3,800 years ago. The solar output model suggests that, approximately 20,000
years after it began, the current interglacial period may come to an end and
another glacial period may begin."

http://www.pnas.org/content/97/23/12433.full

Chris Shaker

            
                            44. **cjshaker** at 19:54 PM on 23 October, 2011
            

In Regards to the Response to item #42, the following articles may be of
interest:

Controversial New Climate Change Data: Is Earth's Capacity to Absorb CO2 Much
Greater Than Expected?  
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2009/11/091110141842.htm

Mathematical Errors Overestimate Persistence of CO2 in Atmosphere  
http://www.suite101.com/news/royal-society-humiliated-by-global-warming-basic-
math-error-a296746

Chris Shaker

**Response:** [Dikran Marsupial] Neither of these articles is of relevance to
a discussion of predictions of an impending ice age made in th 70s. Please
familiarise yourself with the comments policy, off-topic posts are normally
deleted in order to keep the discussion focussed. I'll happily discuss the
first article with you on a more appropriate thread. Note that the second
article does not appear to be supported by any peer-reviewed science, unlike
the statement by the Royal Society, which suggests some skepticism is in
order.

            
                            45. **CBDunkerson** at 21:29 PM on 23 October, 2011
            

cjshaker wrote: "Found a much more recent paper, which is talking about a
return to ice age conditions in the near future

'This altithermal period may be similar to the Holocene Maximum that began
nearly 3,800 years ago. The solar output model suggests that, approximately
20,000 years after it began, the current interglacial period may come to an
end and another glacial period may begin.'

20,000 - 3,800 = 16,200

You consider 16,200 years the "near future"?

            
                            46. **Dikran Marsupial** at 21:33 PM on 23 October, 2011
            

CBDunkerson I have just looked into cjshaker's posting history, and it appears
that he asks many questions, but rarely replies to the answers.

            
                            47. **cjshaker** at 08:04 AM on 26 October, 2011
            

In response to CBDunkerson, did I misread 'Extrapolation of the solar-output
model shows a return to little-ice-age conditions by A.D. 2400–2900', ie - a
couple of hundred years from now?

Chris Shaker

            
                            48. **cjshaker** at 08:06 AM on 26 October, 2011
            

In response to Dikran Marsupial: It seems that asking questions and then
thinking about the replies is a problem?

Chris Shaker

            
                            49. **CBDunkerson** at 20:08 PM on 26 October, 2011
            

cjshaker, no you didn't misread that... but it says "little-ice-age", while
you said "ice age". These are not the same thing.

The 'little ice age' was a brief comparatively minor cooling period centered
around north western Europe.

Technically, the term 'ice age' refers to any period where portions of the
Earth are covered with ice caps... making the past several million years part
of an ice age. However, the term 'ice age' is also often used to refer to
glaciations (i.e. periods when the ice caps expand significantly)... which the
quote you provided suggested could next occur in 20,000 years.

Thus, reading your prediction of an 'ice age in the near future' as referring
to a glaciation would be consistent with common usage of the terms. I have
**never** before seen the term 'ice age' treated as synonymous with the
'little ice age'. One is a term used for two different types of global cycles
that play out over hundreds of thousands to millions of years... the other was
a localized phenomenon that lasted a couple hundred.

That said, I wouldn't generally call 300 to 800 years from now the "near
future" either. In any case, the topic of this post is _global_ 'ice age' /
glaciation. A return to 'little ice age' conditions would be a problem for
Europe, but a non-event for most of the planet.

**Response:**

[DB] CBD, a technical note. We are currently within an interglacial phase of
an ice age, wherein ice age is defined as a period of time where continental
ice sheets are existent upon the globe. That being said, everything you say is
still true. Absent CO2 forcing, the globe had already started the long, slow
return to glaciated conditions. However, evidence suggests that the next
glacial phase has already been skipped.

            
                            50. **Dikran Marsupial** at 02:04 AM on 27 October, 2011
            

cjshaker wrote: "It seems that asking questions and then thinking about the
replies is a problem?", no, not at all, but after thought about the replies,
it is both polite and constructive to post your thoughs regarding the replies,
rather than to simply move on.

1 2 Next

## Post a Comment

Political, off-topic or ad hominem comments will be deleted. Comments
Policy...

You need to be logged in to post a comment. Login via the left margin or if
you're new, register here.

Link to this page ![](images/_core/head/right_top_shadow.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/left_top_shadow.gif)

![](images/_core/foot/eureka.gif)

![](images/_core/foot/protruth_pledge.gif)

![](https://www.skepticalscience.com//pics/crowdsourcing.png)

![](https://skepticalscience.com/pics/Denial101x_ad.png)

:

:

![](images/_core/foot/tcpsite.png)  
The Consensus Project Website

THE ESCALATOR  
![](images/_core/foot/SkepticsvRealists_180.gif)  
(free to republish)

(C) Copyright 2019 John Cook | |  
![](images/_core/head/p.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/p.gif) | ![](images/_core/head/p.gif) |
![](images/_core/head/p.gif)  
Home | Links | Translations | About Us | Privacy | Contact Us

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

