

This website uses cookies for user login, personalised content and statistics.
By continuing to browse the site, you are agreeing to our use of cookies - if
you wish to opt-out of non-essential cookies, you may do so below.

Essential

Analytics

Marketing

More details

☰ ![Cosmos](https://assets3.cosmosmagazine.com/assets/cosmos-

logo-1cb922b53e9f9d975ca391d0931fa545db576e78b49d8415252799a19a46c10f.png)
![Cosmos](https://assets3.cosmosmagazine.com/assets/cosmos-logo-tagline-

abf209343d7bdba30e78a22e9925c12e68b590b3a61b4cd02eed00a5512b4bc2.png)

Account

Log in

                    
                                          * Home
                    
                      * Latest
                    
                      * Topics
                    
                      * Magazine
                    
                      * Newsletter
                    

Gift

Subscribe

                    
                                            * Account Log in
                        * Home
                        * Latest
                        * Topics
                        * Magazine
                        * Newsletter
                        * Subscribe
                        * Subscription
                        *         * Biology
                        * Geoscience
                        * Mathematics
                        * Palaeontology
                        * Physics
                        * Space
                        * Technology
                        * More
                    
                        * Digital Issues
                        * Buy a back issue
                    
                        * Renew my subscription
                        * Give a Gift
                        * Manage my subscription
                    

News Climate 31 January 2018

3 minute read

Share Toggle Dropdown

Save to Pocket Email link Print article Facebook Twitter Reddit Email link
Print article

# 1200-year mini Ice Age was caused by global warming

* * *

## Isotope analysis reveals detailed pattern of ancient weather event, and

prompts warnings of a repeat. Richard A Lovett reports.

* * *

Share

Tweet

![And the ice came back: Isotope analysis suggests global warming was

responsible for a 1200-year cold snap.](https://cosmos-

images2.imgix.net/file/spina/photo/13785/180131-drya-

full.jpg?ixlib=rails-2.1.4&auto=format&ch=Width%2CDPR&fit=max&w=835)

And the ice came back: Isotope analysis suggests global warming was
responsible for a 1200-year cold snap.

picturegarden / Getty Images

Geologists studying boulders left behind by the melting of ancient Canadian
ice sheets are confirming a theory that a 1200-year-long Northern Hemisphere
cold snap called the Younger Dryas was, ironically, caused by global warming.

The Younger Dryas lasted from about 12,900 until 11,700 years ago and saw
temperatures in northeastern North America, Europe, and Greenland drop by a
whopping 10 degrees Celsius.

“[It was] a sharp reversal back toward nearly full Ice Age conditions,” says
Andy Wickert, a geologist at the University of Minnesota in the US, who was
not part of the new study.

One theory is that the downturn was caused by an asteroid or comet impact that
filled the atmosphere with haze, reducing the amount of sunlight reaching the
surface. But it’s not clear how that could have caused such a prolonged
cooling. A more popular theory is that it was caused by the influx of large
amounts of fresh water into the North Atlantic.

At issue is something called the North Atlantic thermohaline circulation, in
which currents such as the Gulf Stream carry warm water from the topics as far
north as Canada, Iceland, the UK, and even Norway. Along the way, the water
chills, becoming denser, until it sinks and is replaced by more warm water
from the south. The process is an important mechanism for drawing heat
northward from the tropics, and a major reason why Norway is warmer than
Siberia.

But fresh water is about 2.5% less dense than seawater. A large enough influx
of it into the North Atlantic would throw a major spanner into the works by
preventing the surface water from sinking into higher-saline depths as it
chills. Richard Alley, a geoscientist at Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, compares it to jamming a screwdriver into a grocery-store
conveyor belt at the point where it goes down, bringing it to a sudden halt.

“It isn’t a perfect analogy,” he says, “but if you dump enough water into [the
North Atlantic] in the summer, the water will cap the ocean the next winter,
freeze, and you will have a cold event,” he says.

(This, in fact, was the idea behind the 2004 movie _The Day After Tomorrow_ ,
although the movie sufficiently exaggerated the science that most scientists
in the field joined the critics in calling it dreadful.)

In the new study, published online in the journal _Geology_ , the researchers
found a route by which a large river could have dumped massive amounts of
water into the North Atlantic at just the right time to trigger the Younger
Dryas cold snap.

The water would have come from an enormous lake, called Lake Agassiz, which at
various times sprawled across large swaths of the Canadian provinces of
Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Ontario. Prior to the Younger Dryas, it drained
south, into America’s Mississippi river and from there into the Gulf of
Mexico, where its effect on climate would have been minimal.

But based on trace isotopes in granite boulders, the scientists showed that a
new channel opened to the eastward at just the right time to trigger the
Younger Dryas, with the water running through the modern-day Great Lakes and
out to the North Atlantic via Canada’s Saint Lawrence River.

The find, says study author Anders Carlson, a glacial geologist at Oregon
State University, Corvallis, came from using beryllium-10 to measure how long
ago these boulders first emerged from beneath the ice.

Beryllium-10 is formed by cosmic ray bombardment, which creates it in quartz
grains, at a rate of about four to five atoms per gram, per year, Carlson
says. By measuring the amount in boulders that had been plucked out of bedrock
by the ice sheet, dragged south by the ice, then shielded by thousands of
metres of it until it melted, he says, it’s possible to determine when these
rocks first emerged into the daylight.

Recommended

![How a 'little' ice age shaped civilisation](https://cosmos-

images2.imgix.net/file/spina/photo/3045/090216_Volcano_H.jpg?ixlib=rails-2.1.4&auto=format&ch=Width%2CDPR&fit=max&w=360)

# How a 'little' ice age shaped civilisation

Climate

He compares it to measuring the amount of sunburn accumulated by these rocks
since they first came to light – although, since most cosmic rays come from
sources other than the sun, “spaceburn” is probably a more accurate term.
Either way, “we can directly date the ice retreat,” he says.

Figuring out the cause of a 12,000-year-old climate change may not seem all
that important, but the reality is that we’re in another era of warming, in
which ice is again rapidly melting. To get an equivalent freshwater discharge
into the North Atlantic, Carlson says, the Greenland ice sheet would need to
entirely melt in about 1300 years.

“That is plausible,” Carlson says. “It’s a lot of warming, but it’s not out of
the realm of possibility.”

And while the Younger Dryas cold snap was a Northern Hemisphere phenomenon,
the same factors that kept heat from moving north caused it to build up in the
south. “Glaciers in the New Zealand Alps retreated,” Carlson says.

Not to mention that cooling in the far north could shift the monsoon.

“Its normal position is slightly north of the Equator,” Carlson says, “but if
you cool the Northern Hemisphere, you could shift the average monsoon belt
south.”

Explore #climate change #geology

Share to Send to Toggle Dropdown

Facebook Twitter Reddit Email link Print article

![Contrib ricklovett.jpg?ixlib=rails 2.1](https://cosmos-

images2.imgix.net/file/spina/photo/4716/Contrib_RickLovett.jpg?ixlib=rails-2.1.4&auto=format&ch=Width%2CDPR&fit=max&h=150&sat=-100&w=150)

_Richard A. Lovett is a Portland, Oregon-based science writer and science
fiction author. He is a frequent contributor to COSMOS._

Looking for more science?  
Click here to see our subscription options. Looking for more science?  
Click here to see our gift options.

![C83 cover 600](https://cosmos-production-

assets.s3.amazonaws.com/file/spina/photo/19202/c83_COVER_600.png)

                    
                                            1. https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/abrupt-climate-change/The%20Younger%20Dryas 
                        2. https://phys.org/news/2013-08-evidence-cosmic-impact-younger-dryas.html 
                        3. https://pmm.nasa.gov/education/videos/thermohaline-circulation-great-ocean-conveyor-belt 
                        4. https://doi.org/10.1130/G39501.1 
                        5. https://doi.org/10.1130/G39501.1 
                        6. http://quaternary-science.publiss.net/system/articles/pdfas/782/original_vol57_no1-2_a07.pdf?1284108221
                    

Share

Tweet

Recommended for you

Humans have been warming the planet for 180 years

Half a millennia's worth of observations show human-induced climate change
started way back in the 1830s.

What two million years of climate history tells us about the future

Data from layers drilled from the ocean floor don't bode well for global
warming down the track.

Massive seabed craters caused by retreating ice and methane blow-outs

Thawing hydrocarbon reservoirs and retreating ice caused explosive methane
emissions at the end of the last ice age, a new study finds.

An Antarctic volcano caused rapid climate change at the end of the last ice
age

Two centuries of massive volcanic eruptions in Antarctica blasted a hole in
the ozone layer and set deglaciation in train across the southern hemisphere.

Popular Today

More![More

Articles](https://assets0.cosmosmagazine.com/assets/more-f1f67121a702aa9c390395d189cf02115471c4567e1e92c802da90d7b754851c.png)

Latest Stories

More![More

Articles](https://assets0.cosmosmagazine.com/assets/more-f1f67121a702aa9c390395d189cf02115471c4567e1e92c802da90d7b754851c.png)

![Spina](https://assets1.cosmosmagazine.com/assets/spina/spina-02855f22a12558b5fdde0e754ebe17e461972a4aac6a44900bf9c81cbeb5c49d.png)
![Parsely logo](https://assets0.cosmosmagazine.com/assets/parsely-

logo-e3e68c87e5824f9be72c9e2ae9df4ca4a27d7f0df595aa6a0c2c3474d551b7f7.png)

* * *
                    
                                                1. Subscriptions
                            2. Back issues
                            3. Newsletter
                    
                            1. Advertising
                            2. Submissions
                            3. Internships
                    
                            1. Contact us
                            2. About us
                            3. FAQs
                    
                            1. Terms of use
                            2. Privacy policy
                            3. Use of cookies
                    

## Logged in as

My account -  
Log out

__

Receive _daily email_ updates from Cosmos

Sign up

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes

