
                    
                                                * Skip to main content
                            * Skip to "About government"
                    

## Language selection

                    
                                                * Français
                    

![](/etc/designs/canada/wet-boew/assets/sig-blk-en.svg) Government of Canada

## Search

Search Canada.ca

Search

## Menu

Main Menu

                    
                                                * Jobs and the workplace
                            * Immigration and citizenship
                            * Travel and tourism
                            * Business and industry
                            * Benefits
                            * Health
                            * Taxes
                            * Environment and natural resources
                            * National security and defence
                            * Culture, history and sport
                            * Policing, justice and emergencies
                            * Transport and infrastructure
                            * Canada and the world
                            * Money and finances
                            * Science and innovation
                    

## You are here:

                    
                                                1. Home
                            2. Environment and natural resources
                            3. Weather, climate and hazards
                            4. Air quality
                            5. Air pollution
                            6. Air pollution issues
                            7. Ozone layer
                            8. Depletion of the ozone layer and its impacts
                    

# Ozone layer depletion: health and environmental effects

## Content

                    
                                                * Introduction
                            * Effects on the skin
                            * Effects on the eyes
                            * Effects on the immune system
                            * Effects on the environment
                            * So What Do I Do?
                    

## Introduction

Ultraviolet (UV) radiation is divided into three categories of increasing
energy: UV-A, UV-B and UV-C. UV-A is a low energy form of UV and has only
minimal biological effects. UV-B, a higher energy form, causes the most damage
to living organisms and materials. UV-C is absorbed by the oxygen in the
atmosphere and never reaches us.

![Did you know?](/content/canadasite/en/environment-climate-

change/services/air-pollution/issues/ozone-layer/depletion-impacts/health-

environmental-

effects/_jcr_content/par/img_0_0/image.img.gif/1506360726392.gif)

The ozone layer acts as a natural filter, absorbing most of the sun's burning
ultraviolet (UV) rays. Stratospheric ozone depletion leads to an increase in
UV-B that reach the earth's surface, where it can disrupt biological processes
and damage a number of materials.

The fact that UV-B can cause biological effects is well demonstrated by the
familiar sunburn that follows overexposure to the sun. However the health
impacts of excessive exposure to UV-B go beyond just getting burned. Exposure
to UV radiation has been linked to many human health problems, including skin
cancer. Scientists also indicate that increased exposure to UV-B rays affects
the human immune system and causes premature aging of the skin.

It is important to note, however, that UV-B radiation has always had these
effects on humans. In recent years these effects have become more prevalent
because Canadians are spending more time in the sun and are exposing more of
their skin in the process. An increase in the levels of UV-B reaching the
Earth as a result of ozone depletion may compound the effects that sun
worshipping habits have already created.

## Effects on the skin

Although fair-skinned, fair-haired individuals are at highest risk for skin
cancer, the risk for all skin types increases with exposure to UV-B radiation.
The effects of UV-B on the human immune system have been observed in people
with all types of skin. There are three main types of skin cancer, basal cell
carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and malignant melanoma. Most cases of skin
cancer in Canada are either basal or squamous cell carcinoma. Basal and
squamous cell carcinomas progress slowly and rarely cause death because they
usually don't spread to other parts of the body. These cancers are easily
removed by surgery. Melanoma is the most serious and fortunately the least
common form of skin cancer. Scientists strongly suspect that malignant
melanoma, which can be fatal, is caused by exposure to UV light.

![Picture of family at the beach](/content/canadasite/en/environment-climate-

change/services/air-pollution/issues/ozone-layer/depletion-impacts/health-

environmental-

effects/_jcr_content/par/img_51026/image.img.jpg/1506357268713.jpg)

Scientists have confirmed that non-melanoma skin cancer is caused by UV-B
radiation, and further believe that a sustained 10% depletion of the ozone
layer would lead to a 26% percent increase in non-melanoma skin cancer. This
could mean an additional 300,000 cases per year world wide.

### Find Out About...

                    
                                                * Preventing skin cancer (Health Canada's It's Your Health page)
                    

## Effects on the eyes

UV-B radiation can damage several parts of the eye, including the lens, the
cornea, and the membrane covering the eye (conjunctiva). "Snow blindness" is
the result of overexposure to UV-B and occurs in areas of the world with high
levels of UV exposure, including snowy regions at high altitudes. Snow
blindness is not unlike a sunburn, and if repeated, can cause damage to eye
over the long term.

Cataracts are a clouding of the eye's lens and are the leading cause of
permanent blindness world wide. They are a result of overexposure to UV. A
sustained 10% thinning of the ozone layer is expected to result in nearly two
million new cases of cataracts per year globally.

## Effects on the immune system

UV affects our ability to fight disease. The body's immune system is its first
line of defense against invading germs. Recent research has shown that some
viruses can be activated by increased exposure to UV.

## Effects on the environment

Ultraviolet radiation not only affects humans, but wildlife as well. Excessive
UV-B inhibits the growth processes of almost all green plants. There is
concern that ozone depletion may lead to a loss of plant species and reduce
global food supply. Any change in the balance of plant species can have
serious effects, since all life is interconnected. Plants form the basis of
the food web, prevent soil erosion and water loss, and are the primary
producers of oxygen and a primary sink (storage site) for carbon dioxide.

![Picture of the sun through flowers](/content/canadasite/en/environment-

climate-change/services/air-pollution/issues/ozone-layer/depletion-

impacts/health-environmental-

effects/_jcr_content/par/img_44030/image.img.jpg/1506366410168.jpg)

UV-B causes cancer in domestic animals similar to those observed in humans.
Although most animals have greater protection from UV-B because of their heavy
coats and skin pigmentation, they cannot be artificially protected from UV-B
on a large scale. Eyes and exposed parts of the body are most at risk.

## So What Do I Do?

![Cartoon sun with sunglasses and

umbrella](/content/dam/eccc/migration/main/ozone/3E8154B2-64F3-417A-BE76-FFC44FD8E102/sun_logo_lg.gif)

There are still ways to protect ourselves from the sun’s harmful rays. Here
are a few simple tips:

                    
                                                * Keep sun exposure to a minimum, especially between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. when the sun's rays are the most intense.
                            * Wear wide-brimmed hats, UV-B blocking sunglasses, and long-sleeved shirts and pants.
                            * Wear sunscreen with a Sun Protection Factor (SPF) of 15 or greater on any exposed skin. Reapply every hour or after swimming or strenuous activity.
                    

Although the ozone layer is the one constant defense against UV penetration,
several other factors can have an effect:

**Latitude**. Since the sun's rays impact the Earth's surface at the most
direct angle over the equator they are the most intense at this latitude.

**Season**. During winter months, the sun's rays strike at a more oblique
angle than they do in the summer. This means that all solar radiation travels
a longer path through the atmosphere to reach the Earth, and is therefore less
intense.

**Time of day**. Daily changes in the angle of the sun influence the amount of
UV radiation that passes through the atmosphere. When the sun is low in the
sky, its rays must travel a greater distance through the atmosphere and may be
scattered and absorbed by water vapour and other atmospheric components. The
greatest amount of UV reaches the Earth around midday when the sun is at its
highest point.

**Altitude**. The air is thinner and cleaner on a mountaintop - more UV
reaches there than at lower elevations.

**Cloud cover**. Clouds can have a marked impact on the amount of UV radiation
that reaches the Earth's surface; generally, thick clouds block more UV than
thin cloud cover.

**Rain**. Rainy conditions reduce the amount of UV transmission.

**Air pollution**. Much as clouds shield the Earth's surface from UV
radiation, urban smog can reduce the amount of UV radiation reaching the
Earth.

**Land Cover** . Incoming UV radiation is reflected from most surfaces. Snow
reflects up to 85 per cent, dry sand and concrete can reflect up to 12 per
cent. Water reflects only five per cent. Reflected UV can damage people,
plants, and animals just as direct UV does.

Report a problem or mistake on this page

Please select all that apply:

A link, button or video is not working

It has a spelling mistake

Information is missing

Information is outdated or wrong

Login error when trying to access an account (e.g. My Service Canada Account)

                    
                                                * GC Key access
                            * SecureKey Concierge (Banking Credential) access 
                            * Personal Access Code (PAC) problems or EI Access Code (AC) problems
                            * Social Insurance Number (SIN) validation problems
                            * Other login error not in this list
                    

I can't find what I'm looking for

Other issue not in this list

Submit

### Thank you for your help!

You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us.

Date modified:

                    
                                        2013-07-08
                    

## About government

                    
                                                * Contact us
                            * Departments and agencies
                            * Public service and military
                            * News
                            * Treaties, laws and regulations
                            * Government-wide reporting
                            * Prime Minister
                            * About government
                            * Open government
                    

## About this site

                    
                                                * Social media
                            * Mobile applications
                            * About Canada.ca
                            * Terms and conditions
                            * Privacy
                    

Top of page

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

