

Skip to main content

# Union of Concerned Scientists

# ![Union of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-
ucs.png)

en español __

## Search form

Search

## Main Menu

                    
                                                * Our Work
                              * Clean Energy
                              * Clean Vehicles
                              * Food & Agriculture
                              * Global Warming
                              * Nuclear Power
                              * Nuclear Weapons
                              * Center for Science and Democracy
                            * About
                              * Accomplishments & History
                              * Leadership & Experts
                              * Funding & Financials
                              * Ways to Give
                              * News Center
                              * Jobs at UCS
                              * Contact Us
                              * The UCS Store: Say It With Science!
                            * Take Action
                              * Science Network
                            * Subscribe
                            * Donate
                              * Renew Your Membership
                              * Become a Member
                              * Give Monthly
                              * Make a Planned Gift
                              * More Ways to Give
                              * Gifts in Honor or Memory
                              * Gift Memberships
                            * Science Network Leaders
                    

**search**

## You are here

                    
                                                1. Global Warming
                            2. » Global Warming Science
                    

# Each Country's Share of CO2 Emissions

En español: **Las emisiones de dióxido de carbono por país** The world’s
countries emit vastly different amounts of heat-trapping gases into the
atmosphere. The table below shows data compiled by the International Energy
Agency, which estimates carbon dioxide emissions from the combustion of coal,
natural gas, oil and other fuels, including industrial waste and non-renewable
municipal waste.

Here we list the 20 countries that emitted the most carbon dioxide in 2015
(the most recent available data).

**2015 total emissions country rank**

|

**Country**

|

**2015 total carbon dioxide emissions from fuel combustion (million metric
tons** **)**

|

**2015 per capita carbon dioxide emissions from fuel combustion (metric
tons)**

---|---|---|--- 

1

|

China

|

9040.74

|

6.59

2

|

United States

|

4997.50

|

15.53

3

|

India

|

2066.01

|

1.58

4

|

Russia

|

1468.99

|

10.19

5

|

Japan

|

1141.58

|

8.99

6

|

Germany

|

729.77

|

8.93

7

|

South Korea

|

585.99

|

11.58

8

|

Iran

|

552.40

|

6.98

9

|

Canada

|

549.23

|

15.32

10

|

Saudi Arabia

|

531.46

|

16.85

11

|

Brazil

|

450.79

|

2.17

12

|

Mexico

|

442.31

|

3.66

13

|

Indonesia

|

441.91

|

1.72

14

|

South Africa

|

427.57

|

7.77

15

|

United Kingdom

|

389.75

|

5.99

16

|

Australia

|

380.93

|

15.83

17

|

Italy

|

330.75

|

5.45

18

|

Turkey

|

317.22

|

4.10

19

|

France

|

290.49

|

4.37

20

|

Poland

|

282.40

|

7.34

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/11/gw-graphic-pie-

chart-co2-emissions-by-country-2015.png)

The picture that emerges from these figures is one where—in general—developed
countries and major emerging economy nations lead in total carbon dioxide
emissions. Developed nations typically have high carbon dioxide emissions per
capita, while some developing countries lead in the growth rate of carbon
dioxide emissions. Obviously, these uneven contributions to the climate
problem are at the core of the challenges the world community faces in finding
effective and equitable solutions.

**Learn more about limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius > **

Last revised date: October 11, 2018

## We Need Your Support

to Make Change Happen

We _can_ reduce global warming emissions and ensure communities have the
resources they need to withstand the effects of climate change—but not without
you. Your generous support helps develop science-based solutions for a
healthy, safe, and sustainable future.

                    
                                                * $25
                            * $50
                            * $100
                            * $250
                            * $1000
                            * Other
                    

Donate

                    
                                                * $25
                            * $50
                            * $100
                            * $250
                            * $1000
                            * Other
                    

Donate

## Share

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    

## Related Content

                    
                                                * CO2 and Heat-Trapping Gases FAQ
                    
                            * The Causes of Global Warming: A Global Warming FAQ
                    
                            * Global Warming Solutions
                    
                            * Global Warming Solutions: Reduce Emissions
                    

## From our blogs

                    
                                                * Bury Myers’ NOAA Nomination Dr. Jane Willenbring, Associate Professor at the Institution of Oceanography; Dr. Amy Freitag is a contract social scientistJune 6, 2019
                            * Wheeler’s Breathtaking Ignorance of Science, in One Comment Gretchen GoldmanJune 6, 2019
                            * Will the Trump USDA Deliver on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans? Our New Report Shows What’s at Stake Sarah ReinhardtJune 6, 2019
                    

More

## On Twitter

Tweets by @UCSUSA

## Infographic

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/02/stand-up-for-

science-sidebar-image.jpg)

We are closely monitoring the Trump administration—and fighting back whenever
science is attacked, undermined, or disregarded.

## THE CLIMATE ACCOUNTABILITY SCORECARD

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2016/10/gw-sidebar-

graphic-climate-accountability-scorecard-burning.jpg)

See how major fossil fuel companies rank on climate deception, disclosure, and
action.

## Take Action

                    
                                                * ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_default/public/images/2019/01/gw-air-pollution.jpg?itok=qWFf0EMB)
                    

We have reached a tipping point on climate action—Scientists say we have
roughly one decade left to avoid the most severe consequences of climate
change. Urge your legislators to act on climate.

We need swift, equitable, significant, and effective climate action. >

We use cookies so that you will have the best possible experience on our
website. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies for site
features. Learn more in our privacy policy.

I Accept

![Untion of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-

ucs.png)

## Science for a healthy planet and safer world

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    
                            * About Us
                              * UCS Leadership & Experts
                              * Funding & Financials
                              * History & Accomplishments
                              * Jobs & Internships
                              * News
                            * Issues
                              * Clean Energy
                              * Clean Vehicles
                              * Food & Agriculture
                              * Global Warming
                              * Nuclear Power
                              * Nuclear Weapons
                            * Our Podcast
                              * Got Science?
                            * Publications
                            * Reports & Analysis
                            * Center for Science and Democracy
                            * Action Center
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * State Disclosures
                            * Our Blogs
                              * The Equation
                              * All Things Nuclear
                            * Site Map
                            * Contact Us
                            * UCS Store
                    
                            * Ways to Give
                              * Donate
                              * Give Monthly
                              * Planned Gifts
                            * How to Help
                              * Become a Member
                              * Take Action
                              * Subscribe
                    
                            * A **Normal Font Size**
                            * A **Larger Font Size**
                            * A **Largest Font Size**
                    

**Union of Concerned Scientists**  
2 Brattle Square, Cambridge MA 02138-3780

(C) Union of Concerned Scientists  
UCS is a 501c(3) organization

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

