

Hardly Any Women Regret Having an Abortion, a New Study Finds

  * Subscribe

  * U.S.

  * Politics
  * World
  * Tech
  * Entertainment
  * Subscribe

![Subscribe](https://subscription-

assets.timeinc.com/current/1850_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

Close

  * Home 
  * U.S. 
  * Politics 
  * World 
  * Business 
  * Tech 
  * Health 
  * Entertainment 
  * Science 
  * Newsfeed 
  * Living 
  * Sports 
  * History 
  * The TIME Vault 
  * Magazine 
  * Ideas 
  * TIME Labs 
  * Audio 
  * Photography 
  * Videos 
  * The Goods 
  * Shop TIME 
  * Press Room 
  * The 100 Most Influential People 
  * Finding Home 
  * TIME Guide to Happiness 
  * The ISS Experience 
  * Next Generation Leaders 
  * Opioids 
  * Person of the Year 
  * Top of the World 
  * TIME Cover Store 
  * TIME for KiDS 
  * TIME Edge 

  * Subscribe 

  * Give a Gift 
  * Newsletters 
  * Feedback 
  * Jobs 
  * Privacy Policy 
  * Your California Privacy Rights 
  * Terms of Use 
  * Ad Choices 
  * TIME Apps 
  * Advertising 
  * Reprints and Permissions 
  * Site Map 
  * Help 
  * Customer Service 
  * EU Customer Service 

Stay Connected

  1. Living 
  2. health 
  3. Hardly Any Women Regret Having an Abortion, a New Study Finds 

# Hardly Any Women Regret Having an Abortion, a New Study Finds

By Nash Jenkins

July 14, 2015

Ninety-five percent of women who have had abortions do not regret the decision
to terminate their pregnancies, according to a study published last week in
the multidisciplinary academic journal PLOS ONE.

The study was carried out by researchers from the Bixby Center for Global
Reproductive Health at UC San Francisco's School of Medicine, and from the
university's division of biostatistics.

Its conclusions come after a three-year research period in which nearly 670
women were regularly surveyed on the subject of their abortions. The sample
group was diverse with regard to standard social metrics (race, education, and
employment) and on the matter of what the study calls pregnancy and abortion
circumstances. Financial considerations were given as the reasons for an
abortion by 40 percent of women; 36 percent had decided it was "not the right
time;" 26 percent of women found the decision very or somewhat easy; 53
percent found it very or somewhat difficult.

The authors of the study concluded that the "overwhelming majority" of the
women participating in the study felt that abortion had been the right
decision "both in the short-term and over three years."

These results offer a statistical retort to the claim that women who have
abortions suffer emotionally as a result, as anti-abortion campaigners claim.
Previous studies cited in support of this claim, researchers said, "suffer
from shortcomings, leaving the question of women's post-abortion emotions
unresolved."

The new study is careful to avoid generalities. It discerns between having
lingering emotions after an abortion and regretting the abortion altogether --
two distinct responses that pro-lifers tend to conflate -- and concludes that
post-abortion emotional reactions are normal, but almost inevitably taper over
time, and that ultimately, very few women altogether regret terminating their
pregnancies.

"Certainly, experiencing feelings of guilt or regret in the short-term after
an abortion is not a mental health problem; in fact, such emotions are a
normal part of making a life decision that many women in this study found to
be difficult," the study reads. "Our results of declining emotional intensity…
[find] steady or improving levels of self-esteem, life satisfaction, stress,
social support, stress, substance use, and symptoms of depression and anxiety
over time post-abortion."

Here's What 20 Famous Women Think About Feminism

!["People have sorely messed up the definition of feminism. It isn’t saying

this is wrong and this is right," said Chrissy Teigen during a <i>Variety</i>

event in 2014, adding that husband John Legend also identifies: "He’s a bigger

feminist than I am! He actually teaches me a lot about the way women should be

perceived."](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/10/chrissy-

teigen.jpg)

"People have sorely messed up the definition of feminism. It isn’t saying this
is wrong and this is right," said Chrissy Teigen during a _Variety_ event in
2014, adding that husband John Legend also identifies: "He’s a bigger feminist
than I am! He actually teaches me a lot about the way women should be
perceived."

D Dipasupil—Getty Images for Extra

![The <i>Twilight</i> actress reacted to women rejecting feminism during a

Daily Beast interview in October: "That’s such a strange thing to say, isn’t

it? Like, what do you mean? Do you not believe in equality for men and women?

I think it’s a response to overly-aggressive

types."](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/10/kristen-stewart.jpg)

The _Twilight_ actress reacted to women rejecting feminism during a Daily
Beast interview in October: "That’s such a strange thing to say, isn’t it?
Like, what do you mean? Do you not believe in equality for men and women? I
think it’s a response to overly-aggressive types."

Loic Venance—AFP/Getty Images

!["I decided I was a feminist and this seemed uncomplicated to me," said

<strong>Emma Watson</strong> at a UN Women speech in September. "Men-- I would

like to take this opportunity to extend your formal invitation. Gender

Equality is your issue, too."

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-16.jpg)

"I decided I was a feminist and this seemed uncomplicated to me," said **Emma
Watson** at a UN Women speech in September. "Men-- I would like to take this
opportunity to extend your formal invitation. Gender Equality is your issue,
too."

Anthony Harvey—Getty Images

![“I would say on some levels I am \[a feminist\]. Angela Davis is one of my

heroes,” <strong>Halle Berry</strong> told Ebony in April. “And Gloria

Steinem—these are people who, as I was growing, I was moved by and impacted by

and thought very deeply about.”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-01.jpg)

“I would say on some levels I am [a feminist]. Angela Davis is one of my
heroes,” **Halle Berry** told Ebony in April. “And Gloria Steinem—these are
people who, as I was growing, I was moved by and impacted by and thought very
deeply about.”

Joe Scarnici—Getty Images

!["I don’t think of myself as being a feminist,” <strong>Sinead

O'Connor</strong> told <i>The Guardian</i> in July. “I wouldn’t label myself

anything, certainly not something with an ‘ism’ or an ‘ist’ at the end of it.

I’m not interested in anything that is in any way excluding of men.”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-02.jpg)

"I don’t think of myself as being a feminist,” **Sinead O'Connor** told _The
Guardian_ in July. “I wouldn’t label myself anything, certainly not something
with an ‘ism’ or an ‘ist’ at the end of it. I’m not interested in anything
that is in any way excluding of men.”

Jason Kempin—Getty Images

!["I wouldn’t say \[I'm a\] feminist, that’s too strong. I think when people

hear feminist it’s just like, ‘Get out of my way I don’t need anyone,’”

<strong>Kelly Clarkson</strong> told TIME last year. “I love that I’m being

taken care of, and I have a man that’s an actual leader. I’m not a feminist in

that sense … but I’ve worked really hard since I was 19."

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-03.jpg)

"I wouldn’t say [I'm a] feminist, that’s too strong. I think when people hear
feminist it’s just like, ‘Get out of my way I don’t need anyone,’” **Kelly
Clarkson** told TIME last year. “I love that I’m being taken care of, and I
have a man that’s an actual leader. I’m not a feminist in that sense … but
I’ve worked really hard since I was 19."

Christopher Polk—Getty Images

![<strong>Leighton Meester</strong> told OOTD magazine in February about her

biggest role model. "American writer Betty Friedan — she fought for gender

equality and wrote the great book <i>The Feminine Mystique</i> which sparked

the beginning of a second-wave feminism,” Meester said. “I believe in equal

rights for men and women.”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-04.jpg)

**Leighton Meester** told OOTD magazine in February about her biggest role
model. "American writer Betty Friedan — she fought for gender equality and
wrote the great book _The Feminine Mystique_ which sparked the beginning of a
second-wave feminism,” Meester said. “I believe in equal rights for men and
women.”

D Dipasupil—FilmMagic

![“I don’t know why people are so reluctant to say they’re feminists,"

<strong>Ellen Page</strong> told The Guardian in 2013. "Maybe some women just

don’t care. But how could it be any more obvious that we still live in a

patriarchal world when feminism is a bad word?”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-05.jpg)

“I don’t know why people are so reluctant to say they’re feminists," **Ellen
Page** told The Guardian in 2013. "Maybe some women just don’t care. But how
could it be any more obvious that we still live in a patriarchal world when
feminism is a bad word?”

Dave Kotinsky—Getty Images

!["For me, the issue of feminism is just not an interesting concept,”

<strong>Lana Del Rey</strong> told Fader magazine in their summer 2014 issue.

“I’m more interested in, you know, SpaceX and Tesla, what’s going to happen

with our intergalactic possibilities."

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-06.jpg)

"For me, the issue of feminism is just not an interesting concept,” **Lana Del
Rey** told Fader magazine in their summer 2014 issue. “I’m more interested in,
you know, SpaceX and Tesla, what’s going to happen with our intergalactic
possibilities."

(Tabatha Fireman—Redferns/Getty Images)

![“I would \[call myself a feminist\], yes.” <strong>Rashida Jones</strong>

said in 2013. “I believe in the unadulterated advancement of women. And we

have so far to go still.”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-07.jpg)

“I would [call myself a feminist], yes.” **Rashida Jones** said in 2013. “I
believe in the unadulterated advancement of women. And we have so far to go
still.”

Christopher Polk—NBC/Getty Images

![“Am I a feminist? F–k yeah, I’m a feminist,”  <strong>Jenny Slate</strong>

told MTV News in June. “I think that unfortunately people who are maybe

threatened by feminism think that it’s about setting your bra on fire and

being aggressive, and I think that’s really wrong and really dangerous.”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-08.jpg)

“Am I a feminist? F–k yeah, I’m a feminist,” **Jenny Slate** told MTV News in
June. “I think that unfortunately people who are maybe threatened by feminism
think that it’s about setting your bra on fire and being aggressive, and I
think that’s really wrong and really dangerous.”

Jason Kempin—Getty Images

!["A feminist? Um, yeah, actually,” <strong>Katy Perry</strong> told an

Australian radio host in March. “I used to not really understand what that

word meant, and now that I do, it just means that I love myself as a female

and I also love men.”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-09.jpg)

"A feminist? Um, yeah, actually,” **Katy Perry** told an Australian radio host
in March. “I used to not really understand what that word meant, and now that
I do, it just means that I love myself as a female and I also love men.”

Mandel Ngan—AFP/Getty Images

![<strong>Amy Poehler</strong> says she's confused by how many women deny that

they're feminists, “but then they go on to explain what they support and live

by — it’s feminism exactly,” she told Elle magazine in January.  "That’s like

someone being like, ‘I don’t really believe in cars, but I drive one every day

and I love that it gets me places and makes life so much easier and faster and

I don’t know what I would do without it.’”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-10.jpg)

**Amy Poehler** says she's confused by how many women deny that they're
feminists, “but then they go on to explain what they support and live by —
it’s feminism exactly,” she told Elle magazine in January. "That’s like
someone being like, ‘I don’t really believe in cars, but I drive one every day
and I love that it gets me places and makes life so much easier and faster and
I don’t know what I would do without it.’”

Jason Kempin—NBC/Getty Images

!["We need to stop buying into the myth about gender equality. It isn’t a

reality yet," <strong>Beyonce</strong> wrote in an essay titled "Gender

Equality is a Myth" in January. She also famously included an excerpt from

Nigerian writer Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s TEDx talk in her song, "Flawless."

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-11.jpg)

"We need to stop buying into the myth about gender equality. It isn’t a
reality yet," **Beyonce** wrote in an essay titled "Gender Equality is a Myth"
in January. She also famously included an excerpt from Nigerian writer
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s TEDx talk in her song, "Flawless."

Myrna Suarez—WireImage

![“I feel like I’m one of the biggest feminists in the world because I tell

women to not be scared of anything,” <strong>Miley Cyrus</strong> told the BBC

last November. ](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-

feminists-12.jpg)

“I feel like I’m one of the biggest feminists in the world because I tell
women to not be scared of anything,” **Miley Cyrus** told the BBC last
November.

Julio Cesar Aguilar—AFP/Getty Images

!["I wish when I was 12-years-old I had been able to watch a video of my

favorite actress explaining in such an intellectual, beautiful, poignant way

the definition of feminism."<strong>Taylor Swift</strong> said in reaction to

Emma Watson's speech at the UN in September. "Because I would have understood

it. And then earlier on in my life I would have proudly claimed I was a

feminist because I would have understood what the word

means."](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-

feminists-13.jpg)

"I wish when I was 12-years-old I had been able to watch a video of my
favorite actress explaining in such an intellectual, beautiful, poignant way
the definition of feminism." **Taylor Swift** said in reaction to Emma
Watson's speech at the UN in September. "Because I would have understood it.
And then earlier on in my life I would have proudly claimed I was a feminist
because I would have understood what the word means."

Isaac Brekken—Getty Images

![“Women saying ‘I’m not a feminist’ is my greatest pet peeve,” <strong>Lena

Dunham</strong> told Metro in 2013. “Do you believe that women should be paid

the same for doing the same jobs? Do you believe that women should be allowed

to leave the house? Do you think that women and men both deserve equal rights?

Great, then you’re a feminist.”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-14.jpg)

“Women saying ‘I’m not a feminist’ is my greatest pet peeve,” **Lena Dunham**
told Metro in 2013. “Do you believe that women should be paid the same for
doing the same jobs? Do you believe that women should be allowed to leave the
house? Do you think that women and men both deserve equal rights? Great, then
you’re a feminist.”

Michael Buckner—Getty Images

!["No, because I love men," was <strong>Shailene Woodley's</strong> response

when TIME asked her whether she considered herself a feminist in May. "I think

the idea of ‘raise women to power, take the men away from the power’ is never

going to work out because you need balance…My biggest thing is really

sisterhood more than feminism.”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-15.jpg)

"No, because I love men," was **Shailene Woodley's** response when TIME asked
her whether she considered herself a feminist in May. "I think the idea of
‘raise women to power, take the men away from the power’ is never going to
work out because you need balance…My biggest thing is really sisterhood more
than feminism.”

Dave J Hogan—Getty Images

![“I’m getting the sense that you’re a little bit of a feminist, like I am,

which is good,” <strong>Lady Gaga</strong> told the LA Times in 2009. “I find

that men get away with saying a lot in this business, and that women get away

with saying very little . . . In my opinion, women need and want someone to

look up to that they feel have the full sense of who they are, and says, ‘I’m

great.’ “](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-

feminists-17.jpg)

“I’m getting the sense that you’re a little bit of a feminist, like I am,
which is good,” **Lady Gaga** told the LA Times in 2009. “I find that men get
away with saying a lot in this business, and that women get away with saying
very little . . . In my opinion, women need and want someone to look up to
that they feel have the full sense of who they are, and says, ‘I’m great.’ “

Kevin Mazur—WireImage

![“\[Feminism\] means being proud of being a woman, and \[having\] love,

respect and admiration and the belief in our strong capacities,” <strong>Salma

Hayek</strong> told Stylist in 2012. “I don’t think we are the same, women and

men. We’re different. But I don’t think we are less than men. There are more

women than men in the world – ask any single woman! So it is shocking that men

are in more positions of power.”

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/09/celebrity-feminists-18.jpg)

“[Feminism] means being proud of being a woman, and [having] love, respect and
admiration and the belief in our strong capacities,” **Salma Hayek** told
Stylist in 2012. “I don’t think we are the same, women and men. We’re
different. But I don’t think we are less than men. There are more women than
men in the world – ask any single woman! So it is shocking that men are in
more positions of power.”

Traverso—L'Oreal/Getty Images

![Children yell to players after a game between the New York Mets and Houston

Astros at Citi Field on September 28, 2014 in the Flushing neighborhood of the

Queens borough of New York City.

](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2014/10/456281014.jpg)

Children yell to players after a game between the New York Mets and Houston
Astros at Citi Field on September 28, 2014 in the Flushing neighborhood of the
Queens borough of New York City.

Alex Goodlett--Getty Images

1 of 21

##

Advertisement

**Contact us** at editors@time.com.

### SPONSORED FINANCIAL CONTENT

![](//assets.time.com/images/dianomi-logo.png)

## Read More From TIME

![](//pixel.watch/f3fo) ![](//pixel.carambo.la/Pixel/tmnc11/112753/0/1/0)

## Read More From TIME

### Living Newsletter

Get the latest career, relationship and wellness advice to enrich your life.
View Sample

Sign Up Now

EDIT POST

![](//subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/1850_top2_205_thumb.jpg)

![](//subscription-assets.timeinc.com/current/1850_top1_205_thumb.jpg)

### Subscribe & Save

Subscribe today and save up to 84% off the cover price.

SUBSCRIBE NOW

![](https://timedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2017/09/time-newsletter-tout-

footer.png)

### Sign Up for Our Newsletters

Sign up to receive the top stories you need to know now on politics, health
and more

SUBSCRIBE

  * Home
  * U.S.
  * Politics
  * World
  * Business
  * Tech
  * Entertainment
  * Health
  * Science

  * Newsfeed

  * Living
  * Ideas
  * Sports
  * History
  * The Goods
  * The TIME Vault
  * Magazine
  * Newsletters

  * Audio

  * Subscribe
  * Give a Gift
  * TIME for KiDS
  * TIME Edge
  * TIME Cover Store
  * Advertising
  * Careers

  * Customer Service

  * EU Customer Service
  * Site Map
  * Privacy Policy
  * Your California Privacy Rights
  * Terms of Use
  * Ad Choices

(C) 2019 TIME USA, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes
acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy (Your California Privacy
Rights).  
TIME may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this
website. Offers may be subject to change without notice. | EU Data Subject
Requests

this link is to an external site that may or may not meet accessibility
guidelines.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

