

Skip to main content

Close

Search

Search

Popular Searches

                    
                                                * Iran
                            * North Korea
                            * Turkey
                            * Syria
                            * China
                            * Mexico
                            * Russia
                            * Venezuela
                            * Iraq
                    

Logo Logo

Search Close

##### Trending

                    
                                                * Tariffs
                            * Russian Hacking
                            * European Union
                            * Iran
                            * China
                    
                            * Member Login
                    
                            * ####  Topics
                    
                              * All Topics
                              * Defense & Security
                              * Diplomacy & International Institutions
                              * Economics
                              * Energy & Environment
                              * Health
                              * Human Rights
                              * Politics & Government
                              * Social Issues
                    
                            * ####  Regions
                    
                              * All Regions
                              * Americas
                              * Asia
                              * Europe & Eurasia
                              * Global Commons
                              * Middle East & North Africa
                              * Oceania
                              * Sub-Saharan Africa
                    
                            * ####  Think Tank
                    
                              * More Think Tank
                              * CFR Experts
                              * Centers & Programs
                              * Blogs
                              * In the News
                              * Publications
                              * Fellowships
                    
                            * ####  CFR Presents
                    
                              * CFR Presents
                              * Events
                              * Series
                              * Explainers
                              * Quizzes
                              * Podcasts
                              * Conference Calls
                              * Independent Task Force Program
                    
                            * ####  CFR Campus
                    
                              * All CFR Campus
                              * About CFR Campus
                              * Programs
                              * Teaching Notes
                              * Model Diplomacy
                              * World101
                    
                            * ####  About CFR
                    
                              * All About CFR
                              * Membership
                              * Member Programs
                              * Outreach
                              * For Media
                              * Careers
                              * Support CFR
                              * Contact
                    

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram LinkedIn

                    
                                                * Member Login
                    

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram LinkedIn

ForeignAffairs.com

ForeignAffairs.com

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print

Share

# NAFTA’s Economic Impact

![](//cfrd8-files.cfr.org/sites/default/files/styles/article_header_l_16x9_600px/public/image/2017/04/NAFTA-

Header-1280x720.jpg)

Mexican commercial trucks cross the border into the United States at Laredo,
Texas. (Josue Gonzalez/Reuters)

President Trump has reached a deal with Canada and Mexico to restructure the
North American Free Trade Agreement, hoping a new trilateral accord will
reinvigorate the U.S. manufacturing sector.

Backgrounder by James McBride and Mohammed Aly Sergie

Last updated October 1, 2018

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email Print

![](//cfrd8-files.cfr.org/sites/default/files/styles/article_header_l_16x9_600px/public/image/2017/04/NAFTA-

Header-1280x720.jpg)

Mexican commercial trucks cross the border into the United States at Laredo,
Texas. (Josue Gonzalez/Reuters)

Backgrounder

                    
                                        Current political and economic issues succinctly explained.
                    

More on:

Trade

NAFTA

Americas

Regional Organizations

Treaties and Agreements

## Introduction

The North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA, is a three-country accord
negotiated by the governments of Canada, Mexico, and the United States that
entered into force in January 1994. NAFTA’s terms, which were implemented
gradually through January 2008, eliminated most tariffs on products traded
between the three countries. Liberalization of trade in agriculture, textiles,
and automobile manufacturing was a major focus. The deal also sought to
protect intellectual property, establish dispute resolution mechanisms, and,
through side agreements, implement labor and environmental safeguards.

NAFTA fundamentally reshaped North American economic relations, driving
unprecedented integration between Canada’s and the United States’ developed
economies and Mexico’s developing one. In the United States, NAFTA enjoyed
bipartisan backing; it was negotiated by Republican President George H.W.
Bush, passed a Democratic-controlled Congress, and was implemented under
Democratic President Bill Clinton. It encouraged regional trade to more than
triple, and cross-border investment between the three countries also grew
significantly.

Yet NAFTA has remained a perennial target in the broader debate over free
trade. President Donald J. Trump says it has undermined U.S. jobs and
manufacturing, and in October 2018 his administration struck a deal with
Canada and Mexico on an updated version of the pact, to be known as the
U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement, or USMCA.

## How does NAFTA fit into the broader debate over trade policy?

When negotiations for NAFTA began in 1991, the goal for all three countries
was the integration of Mexico with the highly developed, high-wage economies
of the United States and Canada. The hope was that freer trade would bring
stronger and steadier economic growth to Mexico, providing new jobs and
opportunities for its growing workforce and discouraging illegal migration
from Mexico. For the United States and Canada, Mexico was seen both as a
promising new market for exports and as a lower cost investment location that
could enhance the competitiveness of U.S. and Canadian companies.

While the United States had completed a free trade agreement with Canada in
1988, the addition of Mexico was unprecedented. Opponents of NAFTA seized on
the wage differentials with Mexico, which had a per capita income just 30
percent [PDF] that of the United States. U.S. presidential candidate Ross
Perot argued in 1992 that trade liberalization would lead to a “giant sucking
sound” of U.S. jobs fleeing across the border. Supporters like Presidents Bush
and Clinton countered that the agreement would create hundreds of thousands of
new jobs a year, while Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortiari saw it as
an opportunity to modernize the Mexican economy so that it would “export
goods, not people.”

> NAFTA's goal was the integration of Mexico with the highly developed
economies of the United States and Canada.

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email

NAFTA also ushered in a new era of regional and bilateral free trade
agreements (FTAs), which have proliferated as the World Trade Organization’s
(WTO) global trade talks have stagnated. NAFTA also pioneered the
incorporation of labor and environmental provisions in U.S. trade agreements,
provisions which have become progressively more comprehensive [PDF] in
subsequent FTAs.

Economists largely agree that NAFTA has provided benefits to the North
American economies. Regional trade increased sharply [PDF] over the treaty’s
first two decades, from roughly $290 billion in 1993 to more than $1.1
trillion in 2016. Cross-border investment has also surged, with U.S. foreign
direct investment (FDI) stock in Mexico increasing in that period from $15
billion to more than $100 billion. But experts also say that it has proven
difficult to tease out the deal’s direct effects from other factors, including
rapid technological change, expanded trade with other countries such as China,
and unrelated domestic developments in each of the countries. Debate persists
regarding NAFTA’s legacy on employment and wages, with some workers and
industries facing painful disruptions as they lose market share due to
increased competition, and others gaining from the new market opportunities
that were created.

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web
browser that supports HTML5 video

Trade and the U.S. Presidential Election

VideoPause

VideoPause

#### Trade and the U.S. Presidential Election

3 min

Embed

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email

Share Share

## How has NAFTA affected the U.S. economy?

In the years since NAFTA, U.S. trade with its North American neighbors has
more than tripled, growing more rapidly than U.S. trade with the rest of the
world. Canada and Mexico are the two largest destinations for U.S. exports,
accounting for more than a third of the total. Most estimates conclude that
the deal had a modest but positive impact on U.S. GDP of less than 0.5
percent, or a total addition of up to $80 billion dollars to the U.S. economy
upon full implementation, or several billion dollars of added growth per year.

Such upsides of trade often escape notice, because while the costs are highly
concentrated in specific industries like auto manufacturing, the benefits of a
deal like NAFTA are distributed widely across society. Supporters of NAFTA
estimate that some fourteen million jobs rely on trade with Canada and Mexico,
while the nearly two hundred thousand export-related jobs created annually by
the pact pay 15 to 20 percent more on average than the jobs that were lost.

Critics of the deal, however, argue that it is to blame for job losses and
wage stagnation in the United States, driven by low-wage competition,
companies moving production to Mexico to lower costs, and a widening trade
deficit. The U.S.-Mexico trade balance swung from a $1.7 billion U.S. surplus
in 1993 to a $54 billion deficit by 2014. Economists like the Center for
Economic and Policy Research’s (CEPR) Dean Baker and the Economic Policy
Institute argue that this surge of imports caused the loss of up to 600,000
U.S. jobs over two decades, though they admit that some of this import growth
would likely have happened even without NAFTA.

Many workers and labor leaders point to these numbers to blame trade,
including NAFTA, for the decline in U.S. manufacturing jobs. The U.S. auto
sector lost some 350,000 jobs since 1994—a third of the industry—while Mexican
auto sector employment spiked from 120,000 to 550,000 workers. CEPR’s Baker
argues that econometric research shows that increased trade also puts downward
pressure on wages for non-college educated workers, who are more likely to
face direct competition from low-wage workers in Mexico.

But other economists like Gary Clyde Hufbauer and Cathleen Cimino-Isaacs of
the Peterson Institute for International Economics (PIIE) emphasize that
increased trade produces gains for the overall U.S. economy. Some jobs are
lost due to imports, but others are created, and consumers benefit
significantly from the falling prices and often improved quality of goods
created by import competition. A 2014 PIIE study of NAFTA’s effects found that
about 15,000 jobs on net are lost each year due to the pact—but that for each
of those jobs lost, the economy gains roughly $450,000 in the form of higher
productivity and lower consumer prices.

![NAFTA Timeline ](/content/publications/NAFTA-BGR-Timeline-1300x920.jpg)

Many economists also assert that the recent troubles of U.S. manufacturing
have little to do with NAFTA, arguing that manufacturing in the United States
was under stress decades before the treaty. Research by David Autor, David
Dorn, and Gordon Hanson published in January 2016 found [PDF] that competition
with China had a much bigger negative impact on U.S. jobs since 2001, when
China joined the WTO. Hanson, an economist and trade expert at the University
of California, San Diego, says that the steepest decline in manufacturing
jobs, which fell from seventeen million to eleven million between 2000 and
2010, is mostly attributable to trade with China and underlying technological
changes. “China is at the top of the list in terms of the employment impacts
that we found since 2000, with technology second, and NAFTA far less
important,” he says.

In fact, says Hanson, NAFTA helped the U.S. auto sector compete with China. By
contributing to the development of cross-border supply chains, NAFTA lowered
costs, increased productivity, and improved U.S. competitiveness. This meant
shedding some jobs in the United States as positions moved to Mexico, he
argues, but without the pact, even more would have otherwise been lost.
“Because Mexico is so close, you can have a regional industry cluster where
goods can go back and forth. The manufacturing industries in the three
countries can be very integrated,” he says. These sort of linkages, which have
given U.S. automakers an advantage in relation to China, would be much more
difficult without NAFTA’s tariff reductions and protections for intellectual
property.

Edward Alden, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, says
anxiety over trade deals has grown because wages haven’t kept pace with labor
productivity while income inequality has risen. To some extent, he says, trade
deals have hastened the pace of these changes in that they have “reinforced
the globalization of the American economy.”

## How has it affected the Mexican economy?

NAFTA gave a major boost to Mexican farm exports to the United States, which
have tripled since NAFTA’s implementation. Hundreds of thousands of auto
manufacturing jobs have also been created in the country, and most studies
have found [PDF] that the pact had a positive impact on Mexican productivity
and consumer prices.

The pact was the continuation of a decade of economic liberalization that saw
the country transition from one of the world’s most protectionist economies to
one of the most open to trade. Mexico had reduced many of its trade barriers
upon joining the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the precursor
to the WTO, in 1986, but still had a pre-NAFTA average tariff level [PDF] of
10 percent.

Mexican policymakers saw NAFTA as an opportunity to both accelerate and “lock
in” these hard won reforms to the Mexican economy. In addition to liberalizing
trade, Mexico’s leaders reduced public debt, introduced a balanced budget
rule, stabilized inflation, and built up the country’s foreign reserves. Thus
while Mexico was hard hit [PDF] by the 2008 U.S. recession due to its
dependence on exports to the U.S. market—in 2009 Mexican exports to the United
States fell 17 percent while its economy contracted by over 6 percent—its
economy was able to bounce back relatively quickly. Mexico returned to growth
in 2010, its GDP expanding over 5 percent, and subsequently falling to around
2 percent in 2014 and 2015.

But Mexico’s NAFTA experience has suffered from a disconnect between the
promises of some of its supporters—that the pact would deliver rapid growth,
raise wages, and reduce emigration—and the deal’s more mixed outcomes. Between
1993 and 2013, Mexico’s economy grew at an average rate of just 1.3 percent a
year during a period when Latin America was undergoing a major expansion.
Poverty remains at the same levels as in 1994. And the expected “wage
convergence” between U.S. and Mexican wages didn’t happen, with Mexico’s per
capita income rising at an annual average of just 1.2 percent in that
period—far slower than Latin American countries such as Brazil, Chile, and
Peru.

Mexican unemployment also rose, which some economists have blamed on NAFTA for
exposing Mexican farmers, especially corn producers, to competition from
heavily subsidized U.S. agriculture. A study led by CEPR economist Mark
Weisbrot estimates that NAFTA put almost two million small-scale Mexican
farmers [PDF] out of work, in turn driving illegal migration to the United
States. (Migration to the United States, both legal and illegal, more than
doubled after 1994, peaking in 2007. However, the flow reversed after 2008 as
more Mexican-born immigrants began leaving the country than arriving. Experts
attribute this to stricter border enforcement, changing demographics in
Mexico, and the combination of fewer available jobs in the United States along
with more in Mexico.)

Many analysts explain these divergent outcomes by pointing to the “two-speed”
nature of Mexico’s economy, in which NAFTA drove the growth of foreign
investment, high-tech manufacturing, and rising wages in the industrial north,
while the largely agrarian south remains detached from this new economy. As
University of Pennsylvania economist Mauro Guillen argues, Mexico’s rising
inequality stems from NAFTA-oriented workers in the north gaining much higher
wages from trade-related activity.

Ultimately, many experts caution, Mexico’s recent economic performance has
been affected by many non-NAFTA factors. The 1994 devaluation of the peso
drove Mexican exports, while competition with China’s low-cost manufacturing
sector [PDF] likely depressed growth. Unrelated public policies, such as land
reform, made it easier for farmers to sell their land and emigrate. As UCSD’s
Hanson has argued [PDF], Mexico’s struggles have largely domestic causes:
poorly developed credit markets, a large and low-productivity informal sector,
and dysfunctional regulation.

## What impact has it had on Canada?

Canada has seen strong gains in cross-border investment in the NAFTA era:
Since 1993, U.S. and Mexican investments in Canada have tripled. U.S.
investment, which accounts for more than half of Canada’s FDI stock, grew from
[PDF] $70 billion in 1993 to over $368 billion in 2013.

However, the most consequential aspect for Canada—opening its economy to the
U.S. market, by far Canada’s largest trading partner—predated NAFTA, with the
1989 entry into force of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA).
Overall Canada-U.S. trade increased rapidly in the wake of Canada’s trade
liberalization. Post-NAFTA, Canadian exports to the United States grew [PDF]
from $110 billion to $346 billion, while imports from the United States grew
by almost the same amount.

Agriculture, in particular, saw a boost. Canada is the leading importer of
U.S. agricultural products, and one of NAFTA’s biggest economic effects for
Canada has been to increase bilateral U.S.-Canada agricultural flows. Canadian
agricultural trade with the United States more than tripled since 1994, as did
Canada’s total agriculture exports to NAFTA partners.

Neither the worst fears of Canada’s trade opponents—that opening to trade
would gut the country’s manufacturing sector—nor its highest hopes—that it
would spark a rapid increase in productivity—came to pass. Canadian
manufacturing employment held steady, but the “productivity gap” between the
Canadian and U.S. economies wasn’t closed: Canada’s labor productivity remains
at 72 percent [PDF] of U.S. levels.

## What’s next for NAFTA?

The deal has long been a political target. In 2008, then–presidential
candidate Barack Obama responded to widespread trade skepticism among the
Democratic base by promising to renegotiate NAFTA to include tougher labor and
environmental standards, a pledge he subsequently abandoned. The issue
resurfaced in the 2016 presidential campaign, with both Senator Bernie Sanders
(I–VT) and Donald Trump criticizing the pact for bringing U.S. job losses.

Among policy experts, much of the debate has centered on how to mitigate the
negative effects of deals like NAFTA, whether by compensating workers who lose
their jobs or providing retraining programs to help them transition to new
industries. Experts say programs like wage insurance, which would guarantee
laid-off workers a portion of their previous salaries for a set period, or
federal Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA), which helps workers pay for
education or training to find new jobs, could help quell anger directed at
trade liberalization.

Introduced in the 1960s, TAA was cut sharply in the 1980s, and many economists
argue that its current funding levels are far from sufficient to address the
increase in trade-related job losses. “There are pockets that have felt lots
of pain,” says UCSD’s Hanson. “The existence of those pockets highlights our
policy failures in helping regions and individuals adjust to the impact of
globalization.”

> There are pockets that have felt lots of pain. The existence of those
pockets highlights our policy failures.

Professor Gordon Hanson, UC San Diego

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Email

Eschewing these policy proposals, however, President Trump instead made good
on his campaign promise to renegotiate NAFTA, and the three countries kicked
off formal negotiations in August 2017. Trump used tariffs as bargaining
leverage throughout the process, applying import tariffs on steel and aluminum
in early 2018 and threatening to do the same with autos. Trump’s demands
included higher standards for the auto industry, more access to Canada’s
highly protected dairy market, better labor protections, dispute resolution
reform, and new rules for intellectual property and digital commerce.

In August 2018, the administration struck a deal with Mexico, and the
following month Canada agreed to new terms as well. In the updated pact, which
Trump has labeled the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), the parties
settled on a number of changes. Rules of origin for the auto industry were
tightened, requiring 75 percent of each vehicle to originate in the member
countries, up from 62.5 percent. New labor stipulations were added, requiring
40 percent of each vehicle to come from factories paying at least $16 an hour.
Trump backed down on his threats to apply tariffs on Canadian and Mexican auto
imports; the existing steel and aluminum tariffs, however, were not lifted.
Meanwhile, protections for U.S. pharmaceuticals and other intellectual
property were strengthened.

As part of the deal, Canada agreed to allow more access to its dairy market, a
central Trump demand. In return it won several concessions. The USMCA will
keep the Chapter 19 dispute panel that Canada relies on to shield it from U.S.
trade remedies. It will also avoid Trump’s proposed five-year sunset clause,
and instead have a sixteen-year timeframe, with a review after six years. To
take effect, the deal will have to be approved by all three countries’
legislatures; the earliest that the U.S. Congress could vote would be early
2019.

More on:

Trade

NAFTA

Americas

Regional Organizations

Treaties and Agreements

Close

### Resources

This 2017 Congressional Research Service report explains the history of NAFTA
and its effects over twenty years.

Economists David Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson weigh the impact of
trade with China and Mexico on the U.S. labor market in this 2016 National
Bureau of Economic Research paper.

Former U.S. Trade Representative Carla Hills explains the economic upsides of
NAFTA from the U.S. perspective in _Foreign Affairs_. The issue also includes
essays on the views from Mexico and Canada.

The _Economist_ examines the progress of NAFTA after twenty years in this 2014
report.

This 2014 analysis from the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School
evaluates the costs and benefits of NAFTA for the U.S. and Mexican economies.

Claims on both side of the NAFTA debate have been overblown, argues this 2014
research overview by the Peterson Institute for International Economics.

### Explore More on Trade

Mexico

Mexico Can’t Meet Trump’s Tariff Demands

Mexico can’t end the migrant flow by itself. But it can—and likely will—raise
tariffs that target swing states.

Blog Post by Shannon K. O'Neil June 5, 2019 Latin America's Moment

South Korea

Korea, the “Germany” of Northeast Asia…

Korea has no shortage of fiscal space. It should use it.

Blog Post by Brad W. Setser June 4, 2019 Follow the Money

Trade

Trump, Tariffs, and Immigration

Podcast

Conference Call with Edward Alden and Shannon K. O'Neil June 4, 2019 Corporate
Conference Calls

### Top Stories on CFR

Mexico

Mexico’s Response to Tariffs Won’t Make Trump Happy

Mexico can’t end the migrant flow by itself. But it can—and likely will—raise
tariffs that target swing states.

by Shannon K. O'Neil June 3, 2019 Latin America Studies Program

United States

Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of D-Day

by James M. Lindsay, Corey Cooper and Elizabeth Lordi June 3, 2019

Israel

How to Read Israel’s Election Turmoil

Israel’s politics have been upended for much of this year by elections and are
now set to be disrupted for much of the rest, while Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu faces likely indictment on corruption charges.

by Martin S. Indyk May 31, 2019

## Footer

Logo

                    
                                                * About CFR
                            * Think Tank
                            * Support CFR
                            * For Media
                            * Careers
                            * Contact Us
                    

Newsletter

Daily News Brief Sign up for a morning roundup of news and analysis from
around the world.

Url

Email Address

Thanks for signing up! Check  
Check your Email Address.

Browse more CFR newsletters

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram LinkedIn

©2019 Council on Foreign Relations. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy and
Terms of Use.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

