

## A Modern Almagest: An updated version of Ptolemy's Almagest

The _Almagest_ of Claudius Ptolemy is often unfairly disparaged by modern
commentators for a number of supposed failings. Firstly, it is often alleged
that Ptolemy's adoption of circular orbits is a major source of error in his
model. This is untrue. Planetary orbits are highly circular, due to their
relatively small eccentricities (the departure from circularity scales as the
eccentricity, e, squared). It is far more important to get the eccentricities
of these orbits (i.e., the displacement of the Sun from the geometric center,
which scales as e) correct, rather than the ellipticities. This is exactly
what Ptolemy does in the Almagest. Secondly, it is generally supposed that
Ptolemy's introduction of epicycles into his model is merely a clumsy way of
retaining a geocentric model whilst allowing for retrograde motion. This is
untrue. The deferents and epicycles in the Almagest have a clear physical
significance. For a superior planet, the deferent represents the orbit of the
planet around the Sun, whereas the epicycle represents the Earth's orbit. The
opposite is true for an inferior planet. Thirdly, it is often alleged that
Ptolemy's model requires epicycles on epicycles, and epicycles on epicycles on
epicycles, etc., in order to fit the observational data to any degree of
accuracy. This is untrue. In the first place, Ptolemy never proposed more than
one level of epicycles. In the second place, a (slightly corrected) version of
Ptolemy's model containing only 10 circles (four deferents and five epicycles)
is capable of accounting for the apparent movements of the Sun and the five
visible planets to an accuracy which is more than adequate for naked-eye
astronomy. It is worth noting that Ptolemy's model contains fewer epicycles
than that proposed by Copernicus, and is also more accurate.

Misconceptions currently abound regarding the details of Ptolemy's model of
the solar system, as well as its scientific merit. Part of the reason for this
is that the Almagest is an extremely difficult book for a modern reader to
comprehend. For instance, virtually all of its theoretical results are
justified via lengthy and opaque geometric proofs. Moreover, the plane and
spherical trigonometry employed by Ptolemy is rather primitive in nature, and,
consequently, somewhat unwieldy. Dates are a major stumbling block, since
three different systems are used, all of which are archaic, and essentially
meaningless to the modern reader. Another difficulty is the unfamiliar, and
far from optimal, Ancient Greek method of representing numbers and fractions.
Finally, the terminology employed in the Almagest is, in many instances,
significantly different to that used by modern astronomers.

I have attempted to reconstruct Ptolemy's model of the solar system employing
modern mathematical methods, standard dates, and conventional astronomical
terminology. I hope that the result will make the full extent of Ptolemy's
scientific achievement more manifest to a modern audience.

This work is available in three formats:

[PDF] A fully indexed and hyperlinked PDF file with embedded Type 1 fonts.
[HTML] An HTML document. [BOOK] A profesionally-bound print-on-demand book.

* * *

Richard Fitzpatrick Last modified: Tue Apr 16 09:15:04 CDT 2013

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

