

Jump to navigation

This site is best viewed with Javascript enabled. Please enable it in your
browser settings.

Google Tag Manager

Global information and education on HIV and AIDS

                    
                                                * About HIV & AIDS
                              * What are HIV & AIDS?
                              * How HIV infects the body
                              * Symptoms
                              * Cure for AIDS
                              * Glossary
                              * I'm worried about HIV
                            * Transmission & prevention
                              * How do you get HIV?
                              * Sex and HIV
                              * Injecting drugs
                              * Pregnancy, childbirth & breastfeeding
                              * Blood transfusions & transplants
                              * HIV myths
                              * Safer sex
                            * Testing
                              * Why get tested?
                              * When to get tested?
                              * What’s involved?
                              * What happens after?
                              * HIV testing personal stories
                            * Living with HIV
                              * Newly diagnosed
                              * Sharing your diagnosis
                              * Treatment
                                * Starting treatment
                                * What does undetectable mean?
                                * Monitoring & switching treatment
                                * Treatment for children
                              * Health & wellbeing
                                * Taking care of yourself
                                * HIV & other health conditions
                                * TB & HIV
                                * Mental health
                                * Being young and positive
                                * Growing older with HIV
                              * Living with HIV personal stories
                            * Sex & STIs
                              * Puberty
                              * Exploring your sexuality
                              * Am I ready for sex?
                              * Sexual consent
                              * Relationships
                              * How to have sex
                                * Oral sex
                                * Anal sex
                                * Vaginal sex
                              * Safer sex
                                * Condoms
                                * Female condoms
                                * Alcohol, drugs & sex
                                * Chemsex & HIV
                                * What is PrEP?
                              * STIs
                                * Chlamydia
                                * Genital herpes
                                * Genital warts
                                * Gonorrhoea
                                * Hepatitis B
                                * Hepatitis C
                                * Syphilis
                                * Trichomoniasis
                                * HPV
                                * Hepatitis A
                                * Pubic lice
                              * First time sex stories
                              * Sex & STIs personal stories
                            * Learn & share
                              * Fact sheets
                              * Quizzes
                              * HIV timeline
                              * Join a campaign 
                              * Personal Stories
                              * Talking HIV
                              * Infographics
                              * News
                            * Hubs
                              * Gay health
                              * Young Voices Africa
                                * Sex without a condom
                                * Unhealthy relationships
                                * Dating older people
                                * Options for contraception
                                * Talking about HIV
                                * How to say no
                                * How to use Young Voices
                                * Evaluating Young Voices
                                * Your comics
                    
                            * News
                            * Around the world
                              * Global statistics
                              * Global response
                                * Funding
                                * Global targets
                              * History
                                * History of HIV & AIDS overview
                                * HIV origins
                                * Timeline
                              * East and Southern Africa
                                * Regional overview
                                * Botswana
                                * Kenya
                                * Lesotho
                                * Malawi
                                * South Africa
                                * eSwatini
                                * Tanzania
                                * Uganda
                                * Zambia
                                * Zimbabwe
                              * West and Central Africa
                                * Regional overview
                                * Nigeria
                              * Asia & the Pacific
                                * Regional overview
                                * China
                                * India
                                * Myanmar
                                * Thailand
                              * Middle East & North Africa
                              * Latin America and the Caribbean
                                * Regional overview
                                * Brazil
                              * Eastern Europe & Central Asia
                                * Regional overview
                                * Russia
                                * Ukraine
                              * Western Europe, Central Europe & North America
                                * Regional overview
                                * UK
                                * USA
                            * Programming
                              * Prevention programming
                                * HIV prevention programmes overview
                                * Prevention of mother-to-child transmission
                                * Voluntary medical male circumcision
                                * Treatment as prevention
                                * Pre-exposure prophylaxis
                                * Harm reduction programming
                                  * Harm reduction
                                  * Opioid substitution therapy programmes
                                  * Needle & syringe programmes
                              * Treatment programming
                                * HIV treatment programmes overview
                                * Treatment cascade
                                * HIV drug resistance
                              * Emergencies and armed conflict
                              * HIV and co-infections
                                * HIV/Hep C co-infection programmes
                                * HIV/TB co-infection programmes
                              * Testing programmes
                              * Technology and e-health
                            * Social issues
                              * Key affected populations
                                * Men who have sex with men
                                * People who inject drugs
                                * Sex workers
                                * Prisoners
                                * Transgender people
                                * Women and girls
                                * Children
                                * Young people
                                * Disabilities
                              * Stigma & discrimination
                              * Homophobia
                              * Gender inequality
                              * Human rights
                            * Science
                              * The science of HIV & AIDS - overview
                              * HIV strains and types
                              * Developing a vaccine
                              * Searching for a cure
                            * Resources
                              * Fact sheets
                              * HIV timeline
                              * Infographics & media
                              * Quizzes
                              * HIV testing resources
                    
                            * Who we are
                              * Vision, mission and values
                              * Staff team
                              * Trustees
                              * Our history
                            * What we do
                              * Strategy
                              * Partners and projects
                                * Umunthu, Malawi
                                * PB, Lesotho
                                * BISO, Zambia
                                * Avert.org
                                * Social media
                                * Young Voices Africa
                                * Hornet
                                * Community Healthworkers’ HIV Hub
                                * WHO HIV and Hepatitis Department
                                * Avert at AIDS 2018
                              * Our impact
                                * Knowledgeable people
                                * Targeted HIV information
                                * Effective civil society
                                * Challenging barriers
                              * Annual reports
                            * Get involved
                              * Ways to give
                              * Join a campaign
                              * Newsletter signup
                              * Avert news
                    

![Home](/sites/all/themes/custom/avertsubtheme/logo_name.png)

# Global information and education on HIV and AIDS

Donate

![](/sites/all/themes/custom/avertsubtheme/images/gray-search-icon.png)

Enter your keywords

                    
                                                * ## Information on HIV
                    
                              * ### About HIV & AIDS
                    
                                * What are HIV & AIDS?
                                * How HIV infects the body
                                * Symptoms
                                * Cure for AIDS
                                * Glossary
                                * I'm worried about HIV
                              * ### Transmission & prevention
                    
                                * How do you get HIV?
                                * Sex and HIV
                                * Injecting drugs
                                * Pregnancy, childbirth & breastfeeding
                                * Blood transfusions & transplants
                                * HIV myths
                                * Safer sex
                              * ### Testing
                    
                                * Why get tested?
                                * When to get tested?
                                * What’s involved?
                                * What happens after?
                                * HIV testing personal stories
                              * ### Living with HIV
                    
                                * Newly diagnosed
                                * Sharing your diagnosis
                                * Treatment
                                * Health & wellbeing
                                * Living with HIV personal stories
                              * ### Sex & STIs
                    
                                * Puberty
                                * Exploring your sexuality
                                * Am I ready for sex?
                                * Sexual consent
                                * Relationships
                                * How to have sex
                                * Safer sex
                                * STIs
                                * First time sex stories
                                * Sex & STIs personal stories
                              * ### Learn & share
                    
                                * Fact sheets
                                * Quizzes
                                * HIV timeline
                                * Join a campaign 
                                * Personal Stories
                                * Talking HIV
                                * Infographics
                                * News
                              * ### Hubs
                    
                                * Gay health
                                * Young Voices Africa
                            * ## Professional resources
                    
                              * ### News
                    
                              * ### Around the world
                    
                                * Global statistics
                                * Global response
                                * History
                                * East and Southern Africa
                                * West and Central Africa
                                * Asia & the Pacific
                                * Middle East & North Africa
                                * Latin America and the Caribbean
                                * Eastern Europe & Central Asia
                                * Western Europe, Central Europe & North America
                              * ### Programming
                    
                                * Prevention programming
                                * Treatment programming
                                * Emergencies and armed conflict
                                * HIV and co-infections
                                * Testing programmes
                                * Technology and e-health
                              * ### Social issues
                    
                                * Key affected populations
                                * Stigma & discrimination
                                * Homophobia
                                * Gender inequality
                                * Human rights
                              * ### Science
                    
                                * The science of HIV & AIDS - overview
                                * HIV strains and types
                                * Developing a vaccine
                                * Searching for a cure
                              * ### Resources
                    
                                * Fact sheets
                                * HIV timeline
                                * Infographics & media
                                * Quizzes
                                * HIV testing resources
                            * ## About Avert
                    
                              * ### Who we are
                    
                                * Vision, mission and values
                                * Staff team
                                * Trustees
                                * Our history
                              * ### What we do
                    
                                * Strategy
                                * Partners and projects
                                * Our impact
                                * Annual reports
                              * ### Get involved
                    
                                * Ways to give
                                * Join a campaign
                                * Newsletter signup
                                * Avert news
                            * ## Donate
                    
                            * ## News
                    
                            * ## Around the world
                    
                              * ### Global statistics
                    
                              * ### Global response
                    
                                * Funding
                                * Global targets
                              * ### History
                    
                                * History of HIV & AIDS overview
                                * HIV origins
                                * Timeline
                              * ### East and Southern Africa
                    
                                * Regional overview
                                * Botswana
                                * Kenya
                                * Lesotho
                                * Malawi
                                * South Africa
                                * eSwatini
                                * Tanzania
                                * Uganda
                                * Zambia
                                * Zimbabwe
                              * ### West and Central Africa
                    
                                * Regional overview
                                * Nigeria
                              * ### Asia & the Pacific
                    
                                * Regional overview
                                * China
                                * India
                                * Myanmar
                                * Thailand
                              * ### Middle East & North Africa
                    
                              * ### Latin America and the Caribbean
                    
                                * Regional overview
                                * Brazil
                              * ### Eastern Europe & Central Asia
                    
                                * Regional overview
                                * Russia
                                * Ukraine
                              * ### Western Europe, Central Europe & North America
                    
                                * Regional overview
                                * UK
                                * USA
                            * ## Programming
                    
                              * ### Prevention programming
                    
                                * HIV prevention programmes overview
                                * Prevention of mother-to-child transmission
                                * Voluntary medical male circumcision
                                * Treatment as prevention
                                * Pre-exposure prophylaxis
                                * Harm reduction programming
                              * ### Treatment programming
                    
                                * HIV treatment programmes overview
                                * Treatment cascade
                                * HIV drug resistance
                              * ### Emergencies and armed conflict
                    
                              * ### HIV and co-infections
                    
                                * HIV/Hep C co-infection programmes
                                * HIV/TB co-infection programmes
                              * ### Testing programmes
                    
                              * ### Technology and e-health
                    
                            * ## Social issues
                    
                              * ### Key affected populations
                    
                                * Men who have sex with men
                                * People who inject drugs
                                * Sex workers
                                * Prisoners
                                * Transgender people
                                * Women and girls
                                * Children
                                * Young people
                                * Disabilities
                              * ### Stigma & discrimination
                    
                              * ### Homophobia
                    
                              * ### Gender inequality
                    
                              * ### Human rights
                    
                            * ## Science
                    
                              * ### The science of HIV & AIDS - overview
                    
                              * ### HIV strains and types
                    
                              * ### Developing a vaccine
                    
                              * ### Searching for a cure
                    
                            * ## Resources
                    
                              * ### Fact sheets
                    
                              * ### HIV timeline
                    
                              * ### Infographics & media
                    
                              * ### Quizzes
                    
                              * ### HIV testing resources
                    

## You are here

Home

»

Professionals

»

Professional resources

»

Around the world

»

East and Southern Africa

»

Regional overview

![](/sites/default/files/download-pdf_0.png)

# HIV and AIDS in East and Southern Africa regional overview

![](https://www.avert.org/sites/default/files/styles/article_scale_style_780/public/East%20and%20Southern%20Africa%20New%20Country%20Headline%20%282018%20FINAL%29_0.png?itok=kTywCT_S&timestamp=1538150678)

**KEY POINTS**

                    
                                                * East and Southern Africa is the region most affected by HIV in the world and is home to the largest number of people living with HIV.
                            * The HIV epidemic in this region is generalised but young women, men who have sex with men, transgender people, sex workers, prisoners and people who inject drugs are at an increased vulnerability to infection.
                            * Improved availability of provider-initiated and community-based HIV testing services now means three out of four people living with HIV are aware of their status.
                            * The number of people living with HIV in East and Southern Africa continues to increase, but access to antiretroviral treatment is increasing as well.
                            * Although laws and cultural traditions vary between Eastern and Southern African countries, there are a number of ingrained cultural, structural and legal barriers that act as barriers to HIV prevention.
                    

Explore this page to find out more about populations most affected by HIV,
testing and counselling programmes, prevention programmes, antiretroviral
treatment, civil society’s role, HIV and TB, barriers to HIV prevention,
funding, and the future of HIV and AIDS in East and Southern Africa.

East and Southern Africa is the region hardest hit by HIV. It is home to 6.2%
of the world’s population but over half of the total number of people living
with HIV in the world (19.4 million people). In 2016, there were 790,000 new
HIV infections, 43% of the global total. 1

South Africa accounted for one third (270,000) of the region’s new infections
in 2016. Another 50% occurred in eight countries: Mozambique, Kenya, Zambia,
Tanzania, Uganda, Zimbabwe, Malawi, and Ethiopia.2

Just under half a million people (420,000) died of AIDS-related illnesses in
the region in 2016, although the number of deaths has fallen significantly
from 760,000 in 2010.3

Despite the continuing severity of the epidemic, huge strides have been made
towards meeting the UNAIDS 90-90-90 targets. In 2016, 76% of people living
with HIV were aware of their status, 79% of them were on treatment (equivalent
to 60% of all people living with HIV in the region), and 83% of those on
treatment had achieved viral suppression (equivalent to half of all people
living with HIV in the region).4

![](https://www.avert.org/sites/default/files/styles/article_scale_style_780/public/Eastern%20and%20Southern%20Africa%2090-90-90%20%282018%20FINAL%29.png?itok=07X7GgmN&timestamp=1539351793)

Between 2010 and 2016, new HIV infections declined by 56% among children (0-14
years) to 77,000. New infections among adults declined by 29% over the same
period, although there is significant variation between countries. Declines
were greatest in Mozambique, Uganda and Zimbabwe. While in Ethiopia and
Madagascar, the annual number of new infections increased. 5

Women account for 56% of adults living with HIV in the region. 6 Young women
(aged 15–24 years) accounted for 26% of new HIV infections in 2016, despite
making up just 10% of the population.7

Although East and Southern Africa’s HIV epidemic is driven by sexual
transmission and is generalised, meaning it affects the population as a whole,
certain groups such as sex workers and men who have sex with men have
significantly higher HIV prevalence rates. For example, in 2016 Lesotho
reported HIV prevalence among the general population at 25%, the second
highest in the world, yet prevalence was even higher among sex workers at 72%
and men who have sex with men at 33%.8

## Groups most affected by HIV in East and Southern Africa

###

![East and Southern Africa: distribution of new HIV infections among key

affected

populations](https://www.avert.org/sites/default/files/styles/article_scale_style_780/public/Distribution%20of%20new%20HIV%20infections%20among%20population%20groups%20-%20Eastern%20%26%20Southern%20Africa%20%282018%20FINAL%29_1.png?itok=Cduixyo0&timestamp=1537953000)

### **Young women**

In 2016, HIV prevalence among young women (15-24 years) in the region was
double that of young men (3.4% compared to 1.6%), and in some countries the
disparity between genders is even greater.9

The reasons behind this are numerous and complex. For example, the existence
of high levels of transactional sex and age-disparate sexual relationships in
many countries increase young women’s HIV vulnerability.10 Studies from
Zimbabwe and Uganda, which have marriage patterns comparable with many other
parts of the region, found young married women with partners who were 16 or
more years older than them were at three times greater risk of HIV infection
than those with partners 0–15 years older than themselves.11

A 2014 UNAIDS assessment of demographic and health surveys carried out in the
region suggests young women face higher levels of spousal physical or sexual
violence than women from other age groups.12. Again, this heightens HIV risk –
for example, a South African study found young women who experienced intimate
partner violence were 50% more likely to have HIV than young women who had not
experienced violence.13

Although knowledge among young people is improving, only 37% of young women
and 41% of young men have comprehensive and correct knowledge of HIV
prevention.14 In addition, only 29% of adolescent women (aged 15-19) at high
risk of HIV infection used a condom the last time they had sex, compared to
44% of their male counterparts.15 Such low levels of condom use may be partly
reflective of the fact that around half of the region’s countries impose age-
restrictions on buying condoms.16

### **Children**

The main route for HIV transmission among children is through birth (see later
section on preventing mother-to-child transmission). However, East and
Southern Africa also has high levels of underage, child and forced marriage.

In 2015, child marriage was estimated to affect 37% of girls in Eastern and
Southern Africa.17 This equates to 7 million child brides.18 As ever, there
are regional differences. For example, in Ethiopia, 14% of women are married
before they are 15 and 40% are married before they are 18. Whereas in
eSwatini, 1% are married before they are 15 and 5% before they are 18.19

Girls who marry as children are more likely to be beaten or threatened by
their husbands than girls who marry later. They are also more likely to
describe their first sexual experience as forced. As minors, child brides are
rarely able to assert their wishes, such as whether to practice safer sex.20
These factors all increase HIV risk.

Increased political will to curb child marriage is growing in the region. In
2015, Malawi increased the legal marriage age to 18 and in 2016 Zimbabwe
outlawed child marriages.21. In 2015, Ethiopia developed a national strategy
to address child marriage and female genital mutilation.22

### **Sex workers**

Although sex workers are disproportionately affected by HIV in every country
in the region, HIV prevalence among this population varies greatly between
countries, ranging from 1.3% in Madagascar to more than 70% in Lesotho and
Namibia. In Botswana, Malawi, Rwanda and Zimbabwe more than half of female sex
workers are living with HIV.23

Although the number of new HIV infections among sex workers in 2014 was lower
than among men who have sex with men in the region, the substantial (but
undocumented) number of clients of sex workers who are exposed to HIV means
HIV among this key population group has the greatest impact on the region’s
epidemic overall.24

It is estimated that at least 90% of sex workers in the region are female,
although selling sex is also common among men who have sex with men and
transgender people.25 The majority of the region’s countries identify sex
workers in their national HIV strategies .26 Despite this, how many sex
workers are being reached with prevention and treatment is difficult to
determine due to a lack of reported data.27

Condom usage by sex workers and their clients varies greatly. In some cases,
sex workers have no access to condoms or are unaware of their importance. In
other cases, police actively confiscate or destroy sex workers’ condoms. A
2012 study in Kenya, South Africa and Zimbabwe found evidence of physical and
sexual abuse and harassment of sex workers who carry condoms. Police were also
using the threat of arrest on the grounds of condom possession to extort and
exploit sex workers.28

Modelling estimates in Kenya show that a reduction of approximately 25% of HIV
infections among sex workers may be achieved when physical or sexual violence
is reduced.29

### **Men who have sex with men (MSM)**

While data on men who have sex with men (sometimes referred to as MSM) in East
and Southern Africa is limited, HIV prevalence ranges from 3.8% in Angola to
36% in South Africa. Overall, one in three men who have sex with men is living
with HIV in the region.30

HIV transmission between men who have sex with men accounted for 6% of new
infections in the region in 2014.31 However, evidence suggests the majority of
the region’s men who have sex with men also engage in heterosexual sex, often
with wives or other long-term female partners.32 The HIV epidemic among men
who have sex with men is therefore interlaced with the epidemic in the wider
population.33

Although limited, data reported between 2011 and 2015 suggest condom use
exceeded 70% in South Africa, Kenya and Rwanda, and was above 50% in Comoros,
Lesotho, Madagascar and Mauritius. eSwatini, Uganda and Tanzania reported
levels below 50% at 46%, 39% and 14% respectively.34

The vast majority of national AIDS plans or strategies in the region identify
men who have sex with men as a key population. However, specific programmes
for this group are extremely limited and constrained by widespread homophobia
and, in some countries, the criminalisation of same-sex practices.35

### **People who inject drugs (PWID)**

Kenya, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mozambique, South Africa and Tanzania are all
home to significant populations of people who inject drugs (sometimes referred
to as PWID). Although regional data is limited, country surveys among people
who inject drugs suggest high HIV prevalence.36 It is estimated that people
who inject drugs accounted for 2% of new HIV infections in the region in
2014.37

In Kenya, HIV prevalence among people who inject drugs was 18% in 2011,
compared to 5.6% among the general population.38, with HIV prevalence among
women who inject drugs thought to be twice that of men who inject drugs.39

In 2015, an estimated 19.4% of people who inject drugs in South Africa were
living with HIV.40 A 2015 study in five South African cities found 32% of men
and 26% of women who inject drugs regularly shared syringes and other
injecting equipment and nearly half reused needles.41

Evidence from Kenya, Mauritius, Seychelles and Tanzania suggests many people
who inject drugs acquire HIV before the age of 25.42

### **Prisoners and HIV in East and Southern Africa**

Although data is limited, East and Southern Africa is thought to have one of
the highest rates of HIV prevalence among prisoners in the world. This is
reflective of high HIV prevalence in the general population and the continued
criminalisation of key population groups. It is also due to the fact that
prisons are high risk environments for HIV transmission, fuelled by over-
crowding, limited access to health care, drug use, unsafe injecting practices,
sexual violence, unprotected sex and tattooing.43

### **Transgender people**

No country in the region has national data on HIV among transgender people.
However, it is thought that prevalence among this group is extremely high.44
Improving data – and disaggregating data on transgender people from data
relating to men who have sex with men – is critical to improve health outcomes
for this group.

## HIV testing and counselling (HTC) in East and Southern Africa

In recent years, a number of countries in the region such as Botswana, Kenya,
Uganda, Malawi and Rwanda have implemented national campaigns to encourage
uptake of HIV testing and counselling (HTC). In 2016, 76% of people living
with HIV had knowledge about their status – an improvement from 72% in 2015.45

Access to HTC has been a major barrier to testing up-take and a number of
strategies have been used to address this. Provider-initiated testing remains
the region’s main approach, but community-based testing is growing as it has
been shown to be effective in reaching large numbers of first-time testers,
diagnosing people living with HIV at earlier stages of infection, and linking
those who test positive to care. Workplace and door-to-door testing, using
rapid diagnostic tests, is also increasing.46

HIV-related stigma remains a huge barrier to testing, something that self-
testing kits may help to side-step. In 2015, Kenya announced plans to
introduce self-test kits.47In the same year, self-testing began in Malawi,
Zambia and Zimbabwe through the four-year STAR (Self-Testing Africa Research)
Project. By 2017, the STAR Project had distributed nearly 750,000 self-test
kits across the three countries.48

Evidence from STAR suggests that, when provided as part of a community-based
approach, self-testing is increasing HIV testing among men and adolescents in
the region, groups that have been previously hard to reach. It has also been
shown to improve the proportion of key populations testing positive who then
access treatment.49

I decided to get tested so that I could be aware of my HIV status. I have big
dreams that I would like to achieve in life like everybody else and I want to
stay healthy and prevent myself from HIV infection. I also encourage my
friends and fellow young people to go for HIV testing regularly and take
control of their lives.

_- Keisha Eldred Mushi, HTC participant, Dar es_ _Salaam_ _, Tanzania_50

## HIV prevention programmes in East and Southern Africa

In 2016, around 790,000 people in East and Southern Africa were newly infected
with HIV.51

A number of countries in the region have conducted large-scale prevention
programmes in an effort to contain and reduce their HIV epidemics. In 2015,
Ethiopia, Malawi, eSwatini and Zimbabwe looked at how to revitalise their
national prevention programmes. In the same year, government representatives
of Kenya, Zimbabwe and South Africa met to plan the development of a regional
roadmap to accelerate scale-up of combination HIV prevention services at local
levels and increase investments for combination HIV prevention.52

### **Programmes for young women**

In 2013 ministers of health and education from countries across the region
committed to bringing in a raft of programmes to address the barriers that
prevent girls and young women from accessing services. Focuses include keeping
girls in school, comprehensive sexuality education, girl-friendly sexual and
reproductive health services, eliminating gender-based violence and female
genital mutilation, and economic and political empowerment.53

**DREAMS**

DREAMS aims to reduce HIV infections among adolescent girls and young women by
40% in Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, eSwatini, Tanzania,
Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe by 2017. It focuses on social isolation, economic
disadvantage, discriminatory cultural norms, orphanhood, gender-based violence
and education.54

As of early 2018, reporting on its 2017 targets has yet to be released but
results released in 2016 show DREAMS had reached more than 1 million
adolescent girls and young women with comprehensive HIV prevention services55

### **Condom availability and use**

Condom availability varies widely by country, with only five countries meeting
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) regional benchmark of 30 male
condoms distributed per man per year between 2011 and 2014.56

Condom use at last sex among adults with more than one sexual partner in the
past 12 months is low, estimated at 23% among men and 33% among women. There
is substantial variation among countries, ranging from 7% among men in
Madagascar to 83% among men in eSwatini. Condom use among men who pay for sex
is higher, at about 60%.57

### **HIV education and approach to sex education**

In 2013, 20 countries in the region committed to improving sexual and
reproductive education for young people. By 2015, 14 were providing
comprehensive sexuality education (CSE) and life skills in at least 40% of
primary schools; 15 were providing CSE/life skills in at least 40% of
secondary schools; and 18 were including sexual and reproductive health (SRH)
and CSE training for people training to be teachers.58

A number of HIV prevention awareness campaigns targeting adults have also
proven successful including the multi-country One Love campaign and South
Africa’s Love-Life.59

### **Prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT)**

Significant progress has been made in the prevention of mother-to-child
transmission (PMTCT) of HIV in East and Southern Africa.

Between 2010 and 2015, new HIV infections declined by 66% among children (0-14
years) to an estimated 56,000.60 However, in 2016 this rose to 77,000.61

The general decline in infections is due to the rapid increase in PMTCT
services, from 61% coverage in 2010 to 89% in 2016. This equates to 854,000
pregnant women who are living with HIV on antiretroviral treatment (ART) in
the region.62

In 2016, Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, eSwatini and Uganda had PMTCT
coverage above 95%, Zimbabwe had 93% coverage, and Kenya, Mozambique, Rwanda,
Malawi, Tanzania and Zambia had coverage of 80% or above. At the other end of
the scale, Madagascar had just 3% coverage, South Sudan had 29% coverage, and
Angola and Eritrea had coverage of around 40%.63

### **Voluntary medical male circumcision (VMMC)**

In 2007, the World Health Organization (WHO) and UNAIDS recommended voluntary
medical male circumcision (VMMC) as a key component of HIV prevention in
countries with a generalised epidemic, following the discovery that male
circumcision could reduce the risk of sexual transmission of HIV from females
to males by 60%.

In response, VMMC accelerated rapidly in the region between 2008 and 2014,
reaching 3.2 million circumcisions per year. In 2015 and 2016 this fell to
around 2.6 million circumcisions, although trends vary among countries. By
2015, VMMC among adult men was still below 30% in Botswana, Malawi, Namibia,
Rwanda, eSwatini, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe.64

### **Harm reduction**

Harm reduction interventions that help prevent HIV transmission, such as
needle and syringe programmes (NSPs), education on safe injecting practices
and opioid substitution therapy (OST), exist on a relatively small scale in
the region but they are growing.

Kenya, Mauritius, South Africa, the Seychelles and Tanzania all offer NSP and
OST services65 and in 2017 Uganda began piloting NSPs.66

Kenya and South Africa are leading the way on scaling up harm reduction
programmes.67 For example, Kenya introduced NSPs and OST in 2012. By 2015,
nearly 90% of people who inject drugs reported using a clean syringe last time
they injected compared to 51.6% in 2012.68

### **Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP)**

In 2015, South Africa became the first country in the region to fully approve
pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), the use of antiretroviral drugs to protect
HIV-negative people from HIV before potential exposure to the virus. A month
later, Kenya followed suit, specifically with young women and girls in high-
incidence areas. Zimbabwe has since began implementing PrEP,69 .

As evidence grows showing the effectiveness and acceptability of PrEP,
particularly for key populations and those unable to negotiate condom use,
roll-out is accelerating.

## HELP US HELP OTHERS

Avert.org is helping to prevent the spread of HIV and improve sexual health by
giving people trusted, up-to date information.

We provide all this for FREE, but it takes time and money to keep Avert.org
going.

Can you support us and protect our future?

Every contribution helps, no matter how small.

PLEASE DONATE NOW

## Antiretroviral treatment (ART) in East and Southern Africa

Antiretroviral treatment (ART) programmes have been scaled-up dramatically in
East and Southern Africa over the past decade.

In 2016, there were an estimated 11.7 million people on ART in region. This is
a three-fold increase from 2010 numbers and represents 60% of people living
with HIV in East and Southern Africa.70

More women than men are on treatment as men are less likely to test for HIV
and are more likely to interrupt or drop out of treatment. In South Africa,
for example, 51% of women living with HIV are on ART compared with 37% of men
living with HIV. Consequently, men in the region are more likely than women to
die of AIDS-related causes despite being less likely than women to acquire
HIV.71

This disparity is partly due to harmful gender norms that prevent men from
seeking help, accepting care or admitting to having a highly-stigmatised
condition such as HIV.72

In 2016, the proportion of children living with HIV on treatment increased to
51% from 19% in 2010 _._ Over 60% of children living with HIV were on ART in
Botswana, Kenya, Namibia and eSwatini in 2016.73

All countries in the region are at least implementing 2013 WHO treatment
guidelines, which expanded eligibility for ART for people with a CD4 count of
500 or less. Kenya, Malawi, Namibia, Uganda, Lesotho, Botswana and South
Africa have adopted the 2015 WHO guidelines to immediately offer treatment to
people diagnosed with HIV, known as ‘test and treat’ or ‘treat all’.74

Although South Africa has the largest number of people (3.9 million) with HIV
on ART, its treatment coverage reaches just over half of those who need it and
falls below the regional average.75 In 2016, treatment coverage was highest in
Botswana (83%) and Rwanda (80%).76

Weak health and community systems continue to undermine the effective scale-up
of ‘test and treat’ approaches. Further gaps in the provision of treatment are
caused by humanitarian emergencies and food insecurity in some places. As a
result, only half of all people living with HIV in East and Southern Africa in
2016 had achieved the viral suppression necessary to prevent onward HIV
transmission.77 However, Botswana has achieved the 2020 target of 73% viral
suppression (set by UNAIDS), and eSwatini is close at 68%.78

Data reported to UNAIDS from 12 countries in the region showed that about 44%
of people accessing ART in East and Southern Africa accessed routine viral
load testing in 2016 – key to monitoring ART effectiveness.79

## **Civil society’s role in East and Southern Africa**

Many civil society organisations (CSOs) were set up in response to the HIV
epidemic and continue to play a critical role in the region’s response today.

A significant proportion of CSOs are led by the communities they serve and as
a result are better able to reach people living with HIV and key populations.
Many are engaged in SRH service delivery and advocacy.80

Funding for civil society, particularly community-led groups, has tended to
come from international donors, and has been dwindling since the 2008 global
economic recession.81 The United States of America’s reintroduction in 2017 of
the Mexico City policy, also known as the ‘global gag rule’, which blocks US
funds to any overseas organisation involved in abortion advice and care, is
likely to result in further funding cuts for many CSOs working on HIV and
sexual and reproductive health in the region.82 Repressive laws against drug
use, sex work and same sex relations also constrain the actions of many CSOs
concerned with the rights and health of key populations.

Encouragingly, national and regional support for civil society has been
growing in recent years, with UNAIDS reporting increasing interest from
several governments in understanding the unique contributions community groups
have in addressing HIV.83

## **HIV and tuberculosis (TB) in East and Southern Africa**

In 2016, ten countries in the region (Angola, Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho,
Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe) were
classified by WHO as being among the 30 countries with the highest
tuberculosis (TB) burden.84

TB is a leading cause of death for people living with HIV. Overall, 240,000
people with HIV died of TB-related deaths in 2016.85

However, the number of HIV/TB-related deaths in East and Southern Africa is
decreasing, falling by 32% since 2004. This is due to the expansion of ART and
the integration of HIV/TB services, which has resulted in 77% of people
diagnosed with TB and HIV co-infection in the region starting or continuing
ART as of 2014.86

South Africa has made gains in providing people living with HIV with isoniazid
preventative therapy (IPT), which stops people from developing active TB, but
IPT is not sufficiently accessible in the rest of the region.87

## Barriers to the HIV response in East and Southern Africa

### **Stigma and discrimination**

HIV-related stigma and discrimination remains a major barrier to tackling HIV
in East and Southern Africa. Cultural beliefs about HIV and AIDS around
contamination, sexuality and religion have played a crucial role in the
development of HIV-related discrimination.88 Moreover, studies have shown how
healthcare workers’ negative and discriminatory views towards HIV-positive
people are influenced by, and often similar, to those in the general
population.89

The region remains a largely hostile environment for men who have sex with
men, sex workers, transgender people, and people who use drugs. People from
key affected populations often experience heightened levels of stigma and
discrimination as a result..90 This often prevents people from accessing HIV
services.91 For example, many sex workers do not wish to disclose their
occupation to healthcare providers and consider stigma and discrimination a
major barrier to HIV testing.92

### **The status of women**

Women and girls in the region often face discrimination in terms of access to
education, employment and healthcare. Men often dominate heterosexual
relationships, and gender-based violence levels are high, especially for young
women.93

### **Legal barriers**

Overly broad criminalisation of HIV exposure, non-disclosure and transmission
in the region continues to stigmatise people living with HIV, which undermines
public health initiatives, and is ultimately damaging to HIV prevention.94

The criminalisation of sex work, drug use, and same sex practices, as well as
the lack of legal recognition of gender identity, compounds key affected
populations’ inability to access HIV services.95 Among countries in the
region, 17 criminalise some aspect of sex work and 15 criminalise same-sex
relationships.96 Some progress has been made however, with both the Seychelles
and Mozambique repealing provisions that criminalise sex between men in
2016.97

### **Structural and resource barriers**

A number of areas with high HIV prevalence, particularly rural areas, have a
lack of health care workers. This is due to a lack of funding for healthcare,
coupled with a continual ‘brain drain’ of healthcare staff from the region to
high-income countries, and an internal ‘brain drain’ from rural to urban
areas, and from the public to private sector. To overcome the lack of
qualified workforce, many countries have implemented task-shifting programmes
and given community health care workers increasing responsibilities.98

### **Data issues**

Despite key populations being disproportionately affected by HIV in the
region, data on these groups is lacking. This makes targeting interventions
that address key population needs, or charting the success of such programmes,
extremely difficult.

Data collection and monitoring of people living with HIV is important for
improving the consistency of care people receive, which ultimately helps
people adhere to treatment. However, many countries in the region do not have
such systems in place due to a lack of technical capacity, human resource
availability and coordination. This makes tracking people across prevention
and treatment services difficult and leads to inaccuracies in reported data.99

However, a number of countries are starting to address this including
Botswana, eSwatini, Tanzania and Namibia.100

## **Funding for HIV in East and Southern Africa**

Between 2006 and 2016 resources available for HIV services in the region have
more than doubled, reaching an estimated US$ 9.6 billion at the end of
2016.101

However, many countries continue to rely on external funding, with eight
dependent on donors for more than 80% of their HIV response.102 For example,
97.5% of Tanzania’s HIV response is funded internationally.103. This figure
stands at around 70% in Zimbabwe and Kenya.104105 South Africa is the
exception where approximately 80% of the national response is financed through
domestic resources.106

In 2015, the East African Community and the South African Development
Community endorsed action frameworks on sustainable financing that commit
countries to increase domestic spending, address inefficiencies in health
services, and explore innovative financing mechanisms in the next five
years.107

## The future of HIV and AIDS in East and Southern Africa

Tackling the HIV epidemic in East and Southern Africa is a long-term task that
requires sustained effort and planning from both domestic governments and the
international community.

In order to meet UNAIDS’ 2020 targets, between 2017 and 2020 the region must
diagnose 2.7 million people living with HIV who did not previously know their
HIV status, start an additional 4.1 million people on ART, and ensure an
additional 4.5 million people living with HIV achieve viral suppression.108

Girls and young women must be placed at the centre of the response if the
region is to drastically reduce HIV. This means meaningfully addressing gender
inequality and inequity, tackling harmful traditional practices such as child
marriage, and increasing educational opportunities.109

Insufficient financial resources, combined with the lack of strategic
information, has led to many high-impact HIV prevention programmes not being
implemented to the necessary standard or scale in the region. These systems
must be strengthened to enable the region’s HIV response to be evidence-based,
and ultimately more effective.

Countries in East and Southern Africa will need to assess how to allocate what
are currently limited resources. For example, increased linkages between
sexual and reproductive health (SRH) and HIV services have been shown to
increase access and uptake for both SRH and HIV services. Using the skills of
civil society organisations and the ability of communities most affected by
HIV to implement services will be crucial to achieving effective results with
limited resources.

Fundamental barriers to treatment, particularly HIV-related stigma and
discrimination and HIV-specific criminal legislation, must also be overcome.
Removing such barriers would encourage more people to get tested and seek out
treatment, reducing the burden of HIV across the region.

Serious challenges remain in terms of key affected populations, including the
criminalisation of same-sex sexual relations, drug use and sex work,
insufficient implementation of harm-reduction programmes, and insufficient
protection of people from discrimination, harassment, violence and abuse
arising from sexual orientation or gender identity. In many countries the
prioritisation of key populations within national AIDS plans and strategies
has not resulted in sufficient financial allocation and programme
implementation to address their needs.110. However, in some countries, key
affected community networks are emerging and regional networks now exist for
female sex workers and men who have sex with men. These networks are essential
to strengthen the response for key affected populations.111

                    
                                                * 1. UNAIDS ‘AIDSinfo’ [Accessed 14/09/2017]
                            * 2. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Data Book’
                            * 3. UNAIDS ‘AIDSinfo’ [Accessed 14/09/2017]
                            * 4. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 5. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 6. UNAIDS ‘AIDSinfo’ [Accessed 14/09/2017]
                            * 7. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards the 90–90–90 targets’ [pdf]
                            * 8. UNAIDS (2017) ‘UNAIDS DATA 2017’ [pdf]
                    

In 2016, 25% of new HIV infections in sub-Saharan Africa (no data available
specifically for East and Southern Africa) were among key affected populations
and their sexual partners, despite these groups making up a fraction of the
total population. Yet programming for key populations remains insufficient and
many people from these groups face stigma, discrimination and legal barriers
that prevent them from accessing HIV services.UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS:
Progress towards the 90–90–90 targets’ [pdf]

                    
                                                * 9. UNAIDS ‘AIDSinfo’ [Accessed 14/09/2017]
                            * 10. United Nations Children’s Fund (2015) ‘Synthesis report of the rapid assessment of adolescent and HIV programme in five countries: Botswana, Cameroon, Jamaica, Swaziland and Zimbabwe’[pdf]
                            * 11. Schaefer R., Gregson S., Eaton JW., Mugurungi O., Rhead R., Takaruza A., Maswera R., Nyamukapa C. (2017) ‘Age-disparate relationships and HIV incidence in adolescent girls and young women: evidence from Zimbabwe’
                            * 12. UNAIDS (2014) ‘The Gap Report’[pdf]
                            * 13. Jewkes RK., Dunkle K., Nduna M., Shai N (2010) ‘Intimate partner violence, relationship power inequity and incidence of HIV infection in young women in South Africa: a cohort study’ Lancet. 2010;376(9734):41–48
                            * 14. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 15. UNAIDS/UNICEF (2016) ‘All in to end adolescent AIDS: A progress report’[pdf]
                            * 16. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards the 90–90–90 targets’ [pdf]
                            * 17. Girls Not Brides (2015) ‘Ending child marriage in Africa: A brief by Girls Not Brides’[pdf]
                            * 18. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 19. UNICEF (2016) ‘State of the World’s Children’
                            * 20. Girls Not Brides (2015) ‘Ending child marriage in Africa: A brief by Girls Not Brides’[pdf]
                            * 21. UNAIDS/UNICEF (2016) ‘All in to end adolescent AIDS: A progress report’[pdf]
                            * 22. Girls Not Brides (2015) ‘Ending child marriage in Africa: A brief by Girls Not Brides’[pdf]
                            * 23. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Towards ending AIDS in Eastern and Southern Africa Region: Leaving no one behind’[pdf]
                            * 24. ibid
                            * 25. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Towards ending AIDS in Eastern and Southern Africa Region: Leaving no one behind’[pdf]
                            * 26. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 27. UNAIDS (2013) ‘Getting to zero: HIV in eastern and southern Africa’[pdf]
                            * 28. The Open Society Foundation (2012) ‘How Policing Practices Put Sex Workers and HIV Services at Risk in Kenya, Namibia, Russia, South Africa, the United States, and Zimbabwe’[pdf]
                            * 29. Decker MR, et al. (2013) ‘Estimating the impact of reducing violence against female sex workers on HIV epidemics in Kenya and Ukraine: a policy modeling exercise’ Am J Reprod Immunol, 69 Suppl1:122–132
                            * 30. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Towards ending AIDS in Eastern and Southern Africa Region: Leaving no one behind’[pdf]
                            * 31. ibid
                            * 32. For example, see: Beyrer C., Trapence G., Motimedi F., Umar E., Iipinge S., Dausab F., et al. (2010) ‘Bisexual concurrency, bisexual partnerships, and HIV among Southern African men who have sex with men’ Sexually Transmitted Infections, 86(4):323–327 and Broz D., Okal J., Tun W., Sheehy M., Mutua M., Muraguri N., et al. (2011) ‘High levels of bisexual behaviors among men who have sex with men in Nairobi, Kenya’ ,6th IAS Conference on HIV Pathogenesis, Treatment and Prevention Rome, Italy, July 17–20, 2011, Abstract no MOLBPE046
                            * 33. UNAIDS (2013) ‘Getting to zero: HIV in eastern and southern Africa’ [pdf]
                            * 34. UNAIDS (2017) ‘UNAIDS DATA 2017’ [pdf]
                            * 35. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report' [pdf]
                            * 36. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 37. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Towards ending AIDS in Eastern and Southern Africa Region: Leaving no one behind’ [pdf]
                            * 38. In Tanzania it is estimated that 35% of people who inject drugs are living with HIVNACP (2014) ‘Consensus Estimates on Key Population Size and HIV Prevalence in Tanzania’ [pdf]
                            * 39. NACP (2014) ‘Consensus Estimates on Key Population Size and HIV Prevalence in Tanzania’ [pdf]
                            * 40. South African National AIDS Council (2015) ‘Global AIDS Response Progress Report’[pdf]
                            * 41. Scheibe, A., et al (2015) ‘Rapid assessment of HIV prevalence and HIV-related risks among people who inject drugs in five South African cities’, The International Journal of Drug Policy, Vol 30, 107-115
                            * 42. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report' [pdf]
                            * 43. Dolan, K., Wirtz, AL., Moazen, B., et al (2016) ‘Global burden of HIV, viral hepatitis, and tuberculosis in prisoners and detainees’ The Lancet, 2016; 388: 1089–102 [pdf]
                            * 44. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Towards ending AIDS in Eastern and Southern Africa Region: Leaving no one behind’[pdf]
                            * 45. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 46. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 47. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report' [pdf]
                            * 48. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 49. ibid
                            * 50. UNAIDS (13 March, 2015) ‘Update: Closing the HIV testing gap in southern and eastern Africa’ (Accessed 7/2/2017)
                            * 51. UNAIDS (2017) ‘UNAIDS DATA 2017’ [pdf]
                            * 52. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 53. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 54. USAID ‘DREAMS: Partnership to Reduce HIV/AIDS in Adolescent Girls and Young Women’ (Accessed 7/2/2017)
                            * 55. PEPFAR (2017) ‘Annual report to Congress’[pdf]. In the same year, the South African government created She Conquers, a national campaign to implement the DREAMS programme beyond the districts already being supported. Also in 2016, eSwatini partnered with the Global Fund and the National Emergency Response Council on HIV/AIDS, resulting in close to national coverage on HIV prevention for adolescent girls and young women.UNAIDS/UNICEF (2016) ‘All in to end adolescent AIDS: A progress report’[pdf]
                            * 56. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 57. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 58. Young People Today ‘Regional progress 2015: target highlights’ (Accessed 11/01/2018)
                            * 59. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 60. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 61. UNAIDS ‘East and Southern Africa: Data 2016’ (Accessed 10/01/2018)
                            * 62. UNAIDS ‘AIDSinfo’ (Accessed 11/01/2018)
                            * 63. UNAIDS (2017) ‘UNAIDS DATA 2017’ [pdf]
                            * 64. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards the 90–90–90 targets’ [pdf]
                            * 65. Harm Reduction International (2016) ‘The Global State of Harm Reduction Regional Overview: Sub-Saharan Africa’[pdf]
                            * 66. Int HIV/AIDS Alliance (26 October, 2017) ‘Breakthrough as Uganda announces harm reduction pilot’ (Accessed 11/01/2018)
                            * 67. Harm Reduction International (2016) ‘The Global State of Harm Reduction Regional Overview: Sub-Saharan Africa’[pdf]
                            * 68. The International HIV/AIDS Alliance (2016) ‘Achievements and challenges in introducing a harm reduction programme in Kenya’[pdf]
                            * 69. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards the 90–90–90 targets’ [pdf]
                            * 70. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 71. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards the 90–90–90 targets’ [pdf]
                            * 72. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Addressing a blind spot in the response to HIV — Reaching out to men and boys’ [pdf]
                            * 73. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 74. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 75. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Data Book’
                            * 76. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 77. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 78. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards the 90–90–90 targets’ [pdf]
                            * 79. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 80. AIDS Accountability International (2015) ‘Mapping report of civil society and access to medicines in Southern Africa’ [pdf]
                            * 81. AIDS Accountability International (2015) ‘Mapping report of civil society and access to medicines in Southern Africa’ [pdf]
                            * 82. The Guardian (14 February, 2017) ‘Trump's 'global gag rule' could endanger millions of women and children, Bill and Melinda Gates warn’ (Accessed 11/01/2018)
                            * 83. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 84. WHO (2017) ‘World Tuberculosis Report 2017’ [pdf]
                            * 85. UNAIDS ‘East and Southern Africa: Data 2016’ (Accessed 11/01/2018)
                            * 86. ARASA (2016) ‘HIV, TB and human rights in East and Southern Africa’ [pdf]
                            * 87. ibid
                            * 88. Mbonu, N.C. et al (2009) 'Stigma of People with HIV/AIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Literature Review' Journal of Tropical Medicine
                            * 89. Ahsan Ullah, A.K.M. (2011) 'HIV/AIDS-Related Stigma and Discrimination: A Study of Health Care Providers in Bangladesh' JIAPAC 10(2):97-104
                            * 90. AIDS & Rights Alliance for Southern Africa (ARASA) (2016) ‘HIV, TB and Human Rights in Southern and East Africa: Report 2016’[pdf]
                            * 91. AIDS & Rights Alliance for Southern Africa (ARASA) (2016) ‘HIV, TB and Human Rights in Southern and East Africa: Report 2016’[pdf]
                            * 92. African Sex Worker Alliance (2011) ‘“I expect to be abused and I have fear”: sex workers’ experiences of human rights violations and barriers to accessing healthcare in four African countries’ [pdf]
                            * 93. Ellsberg, A. & Betron, M. (2010) 'Preventing Gender-Based Violence and HIV: Lessons from the Field' AIDSTAR-One: Spotlight on Gender[pdf] 
                            * 94. AIDS & Rights Alliance for Southern Africa (ARASA) (2016) ‘HIV, TB and Human Rights in Southern and East Africa: Report 2016’ [pdf]
                            * 95. AIDS & Rights Alliance for Southern Africa (ARASA) (2016) ‘HIV, TB and Human Rights in Southern and East Africa: Report 2016’[pdf]
                            * 96. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'
                            * 97. AIDS & Rights Alliance for Southern Africa (ARASA) (2016) ‘HIV, TB and Human Rights in Southern and East Africa: Report 2016’[pdf]
                            * 98. Vermund SH. et al (2015) ‘Southern Africa: The highest priority region for HIV prevention and care interventions’ Curr HIV/AIDS Rep, 12(2): 191–195
                            * 99. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report' [pdf]
                            * 100. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards the 90–90–90 targets’ [pdf]
                            * 101. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards 90-90-90 targets’
                            * 102. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards the 90–90–90 targets’ [pdf]
                            * 103. PEPFAR (2015) ‘Tanzania: Country Operational Plan 2015’[pdf]
                            * 104. National AIDS Control Council of Kenya (2014) 'Kenya AIDS Response Progress Report 2014: Progress towards Zero' [pdf]
                            * 105. Zimbabwe Ministry of Health (2016) 'GARPR Zimbabwe Country Progress Report 2016'[pdf]
                            * 106. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report' [pdf]
                            * 107. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report' [pdf]
                            * 108. UNAIDS (2017) ‘Ending AIDS: Progress towards the 90–90–90 targets’ [pdf]
                            * 109. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report' [pdf]
                            * 110. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report'[pdf]
                            * 111. UNAIDS (2016) 'Prevention Gap Report' [pdf]
                    

Last full review:

28 February 2018

Next full review:

28 February 2021

## Would you like to comment on this page?

1 Start 2 Complete

Please let us know any comments you have about the content on this page.
Please note that we are unable to respond to any questions, or offer advice or
information in relation to personal matters. We will not hold your personal
data or use it for any other purpose. We are not able to acknowledge receipt
of emails.

Name

Email address

Your feedback *

page URL

Leave this field blank

Last updated:

26 February 2019

Last full review:

28 February 2018

Next full review:

28 February 2021

![](https://www.avert.org/sites/all/modules/custom/avert_share_selection/images/email.png)

![](https://www.avert.org/sites/all/modules/custom/avert_share_selection/images/twitter.png)

![](https://www.avert.org/sites/all/modules/custom/avert_share_selection/images/facebook.png)

![](https://www.avert.org/sites/all/modules/custom/avert_share_selection/images/linkedin.png)

                    
                                                * Global statistics
                            * Global response
                              * Funding
                              * Global targets
                            * History
                              * History of HIV & AIDS overview
                              * HIV origins
                              * Timeline
                            * East and Southern Africa
                              * Regional overview
                              * Botswana
                              * Kenya
                              * Lesotho
                              * Malawi
                              * South Africa
                              * eSwatini
                              * Tanzania
                              * Uganda
                              * Zambia
                              * Zimbabwe
                            * West and Central Africa
                            * Asia & the Pacific
                            * Middle East & North Africa
                            * Latin America and the Caribbean
                            * Eastern Europe & Central Asia
                            * Western Europe, Central Europe & North America
                    

## Share

![](/sites/default/files/download-pdf_0.png)

## Related News

                    
                                                * Community based adherence clubs have higher drop-out rates than those based in clinics
                    
                            * Point-of-care devices for infant HIV diagnosis are effective and feasible in 8 African countries
                    
                            * Exposure to HIV treatment during breastfeeding does not impact infant neurodevelopment
                    
                            * Mixed status couples prefer combination HIV protection in Kenya
                    
                            * Churches can help increase HIV testing in South African men
                    

## Trending

                    
                                                * Humanitarian emergencies, armed conflict and the HIV response
                    
                            * Young people, HIV and AIDS
                    
                            * HIV and AIDS in Kenya
                    
                            * Gender inequality and HIV
                    
                            * Global response to HIV and AIDS
                    

## Related links

                    
                                                * HIV and AIDS in West and Central Africa Overview
                    

## Subscribe to our mailing list

            * indicates required

Email Address *

First Name

Last Name

**Newsletter options**

                    
                                                * HIV news digest - updates on the latest HIV news
                            * Avert news - updates on Avert’s work, impact and fundraising
                            * Press releases
                    

## Popular resources

About Avert  
Our impact  
Support us  
Newsletters  
Young Voices  
Learn and share  
HIV timeline

## Contact us

E: [email protected]  
Use contact form  
Tell your story

![Information Standard

Logo](/sites/default/files/styles/article_scale_style_780/public/information-

standard-logo%20black%20e_0.png)

## Help us

Help us empower people through knowledge and achieve a world that is free of
HIV. Every £1 you donate to Avert, helps us achieve that vision.

Donate

## Follow us

                    
                                                * ![Facebook icon](https://www.avert.org/sites/all/modules/contrib/social_media_links/libraries/elegantthemes/PNG/facebook.png)
                            * ![Twitter icon](https://www.avert.org/sites/all/modules/contrib/social_media_links/libraries/elegantthemes/PNG/twitter.png)
                            * ![LinkedIn icon](https://www.avert.org/sites/all/modules/contrib/social_media_links/libraries/elegantthemes/PNG/linkedin.png)
                            * ![YouTube icon](https://www.avert.org/sites/all/modules/contrib/social_media_links/libraries/elegantthemes/PNG/youtube.png)
                            * ![Instagram icon](https://www.avert.org/sites/all/modules/contrib/social_media_links/libraries/elegantthemes/PNG/instagram.png)
                    
                            * Jobs
                            * Media
                            * Terms and conditions
                            * Creative Commons
                            * Privacy policy
                            * Sitemap
                    

All material on www.avert.org is copyright Avert (unless stated otherwise).
All rights reserved. Registered UK charity number: 1074849. Registered UK
company number: 3716796.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

