

Skip to content

![Elsevier

Tree](data:image/png;base64,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)
![Elsevier

Wordmark](data:image/png;base64,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)

                    
                                                * About Elsevier
                    
                              * About us 
                              * Elsevier Connect 
                              * Careers
                    
                            * Products & Solutions
                    
                              * R & D Solutions 
                              * Clinical Solutions 
                              * Research Platforms 
                              * Research Intelligence 
                              * Education 
                              * All Solutions
                    
                            * Services
                    
                              * Authors 
                              * Editors 
                              * Reviewers 
                              * Librarians
                    
                            * Shop & Discover
                    
                              * Books and Journals 
                              * Author Webshop  (Opens new window)
                    
                            * Search Search
                            * View Cart
                    

0

                    
                                                *             * View account Sign out
                    

Sign in to view your account details and order history

Sign in

View account Sign out

                    
                                                * About Elsevier
                    
                              * About us
                              * Elsevier Connect
                              * Careers
                            * Products & Solutions
                    
                              * R & D Solutions
                              * Clinical Solutions
                              * Research Platforms
                              * Research Intelligence
                              * Education
                              * All Solutions
                            * Services
                    
                              * Authors
                              * Editors
                              * Reviewers
                              * Librarians
                            * Shop & Discover
                    
                              * Books and Journals
                              * Author Webshop (Opens new window)
                    

Search for books, journals or webpages... Search

                    
                                                * All
                            * Pages
                            * Books
                            * Journals
                    
                            1. Home
                            2. Reviewers
                            3. What is peer review?
                    

# What is peer review?

Reviewers play a pivotal role in scholarly publishing. The peer review system
exists to validate academic work, helps to improve the quality of published
research, and increases networking possibilities within research communities.
Despite criticisms, peer review is still the only widely accepted method for
research validation and has continued successfully with relatively minor
changes for some 350 years.

                    
                                                * Background
                            * Peer review process
                            * Types of peer review
                            * Article transfer service
                            * Interesting reads
                    

## Background

Elsevier relies on the peer review process to uphold the quality and validity
of individual articles and the journals that publish them.

Peer review has been a formal part of scientific communication since the first
scientific journals appeared more than 300 years ago. The Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society is thought to be the first journal to
formalize the peer review process under the editorship of Henry Oldenburg
(1618- 1677).

Despite many criticisms about the integrity of peer review, the majority of
the research community still believes peer review is the best form of
scientific evaluation. This opinion was endorsed by the outcome of a survey
Elsevier and Sense About Science conducted in 2009 and has since been further
confirmed by other publisher and scholarly organization surveys. Furthermore,
a 2015 survey by the Publishing Research Consortium, saw 82 percent of
researchers agreeing that "without peer review there is no control in
scientific communication."

To learn more about peer review, visit Elsevier's free e-learning platform
Researcher Academy.

* * *

## The peer review process

![](https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/image/0010/655867/3-s2.0-B9780128099698000073-f07-02-9780128099698.jpg)

* * *

## Types of peer review

Peer review comes in different flavours: you must therefore check which
variant is employed by the journal on which you are working so you're aware of
the respective rules. Each system has its own advantages and disadvantages.
Often one type of review will be preferred by a subject community but there is
an increasing call towards more transparency around the peer review process.
In case of questions regarding the peer review model employed by the journal
for which you have been invited to review, consult the journal's homepage or
contact the editorial office directly.

### Single blind review

In this type of review, the names of the reviewers are hidden from the author.
This is the traditional method of reviewing and is the most common type by
far. Points to consider regarding single blind review include:

                    
                                                * Reviewer anonymity allows for impartial decisions - the reviewers should not be influenced by the authors.
                            * Authors may be concerned that reviewers in their field could delay publication, giving the reviewers a chance to publish first.
                            * Reviewers may use their anonymity as justification for being unnecessarily critical or harsh when commenting on the authors' work.
                    

### Double-blind review

Both the reviewer and the author are anonymous in this model. Some advantages
of this model are listed below.

                    
                                                * Author anonymity limits reviewer bias, for example based on an author's gender, country of origin, academic status or previous publication history.
                            * Articles written by prestigious or renowned authors are considered on the basis of the content of their papers, rather than their reputation.
                    

But bear in mind that despite the above, reviewers can often identify the
author through their writing style, subject matter or self-citation - it is
exceedingly difficult to guarantee total author anonymity. More information
for authors can be found in our double-blind peer review guidelines.

### Triple-blind review

With triple-blind review, reviewers are anonymous and the author's identity is
unknown to both the reviewers and the editor. Articles are anonymized at the
submission stage and are handled in such a way to minimize any potential bias
towards the author(s). However, it should be noted that:

                    
                                                * the complexities involved with anonymizing articles/authors to this level are considerable
                            * as with double-blind review; there is still a possibility for the editor and/or reviewers to correctly divine the author's identity from their style, subject matter, citation patterns or a number of other methodologies
                    

### Open review

Open peer review is an umbrella term for many different models aiming at
greater transparency during and after the peer review process. The most common
definition of open review is when both the reviewer and author are known to
each other during the peer review process. Other types of open peer review
consist of:

                    
                                                * publication of reviewers' names on the article page.
                            * publication of peer review reports alongside the article, whether signed or anonymous.
                            * publication of peer review reports (signed or anonymous) together with authors' and editors' responses alongside the article.
                            * publication of the paper after a quick check and opening a discussion forum to the community who can comment (named or anonymous).
                    

Many believe this is the best way to prevent malicious comments, stop
plagiarism, prevent reviewers from following their own agenda, and encourage
open, honest reviewing. Others see open review as a less honest process, in
which politeness or fear of retribution may cause a reviewer to withhold or
tone down criticism.

For three years, five Elsevier journals experimented with publication of peer
review reports (signed or anonymous) as articles alongside the accepted paper
on ScienceDirect (example).

Read more about the experiment

### More transparent peer review

In general transparency is the key to trust in peer review. Many Elsevier
journals therefore publish the name of the article's handling editor on the
published paper on ScienceDirect. Some journals also provide details about the
number of reviewers who reviewed the article before acceptance.

Furthermore, in order to provide updates and feedback to reviewers, most
Elsevier journals inform reviewers about the editor's decision and their
peers' recommendations.

* * *

## Article transfer service: peer review cascade

Elsevier authors can transfer their article submission from one journal to
another for free if they are rejected, without the need to reformat, and often
without needing further peer review. For this reason, reviewers are informed
about the service and are asked for their consent for transferring their
review report along with the manuscript to the receiver journal. Reviewers are
given the option to reveal their identity to the editor of the receiver
journal or stay anonymous. The benefits of manuscript review cascades are
twofold:

                    
                                                * Reviewers are not asked to review the same manuscript several times for different journals.
                            * Authors do not need to spend additional time reformatting their manuscript.
                    

* * *

## Tools and resources

### General resources

                    
                                                * Mendeley Public Library of Peer Review Studies group
                    

### Interesting reads

                    
                                                * Chapter 2 of Academic and Professional Publishing, 2012, by Irene Hames in 2012
                            * "Is Peer Review in Crisis?" Perspectives in Publishing No 2, August 2004, by Adrian Mulligan
                            * "The history of the peer-review process" Trends in Biotechnology, 2002, by Ray Spier
                    

### Reviewers' Update articles

![](https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/image/0005/560930/iStock-488563253-istockphoto-

Rawpixel-1200-x-600.jpg)

Innovation in peer review: introducing "volunpeers"

![](https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/image/0005/529061/iStock-578309084-credit-

xijian-1200-x-600.jpg)

Results masked review: peer review without publication bias

![](https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/image/0020/206390/TransparencyImage_1200x600.jpg)

Is open peer review the way forward?

![](https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/image/0003/758802/reviewersupdate.jpg)

5 reasons why peer review matters

![](https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/image/0003/758802/reviewersupdate.jpg)

Peer review innovations aiming to support science and reward reviewers

![](https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/image/0010/43885/Peer-Review-

Feature.jpg)

Experimenting with collaborative peer review

### Elsevier Researcher Academy modules

![](https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/image/0010/672625/understanding-

peer-review.JPG)

Understanding the peer review process

![](https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/image/0009/672624/transparency.JPG)

Transparency in peer review

                    
                                                * Solutions
                    

Solutions

                    
                                                  * Scopus
                              * ScienceDirect
                              * Mendeley
                              * Evolve
                              * Knovel
                              * Reaxys
                              * ClinicalKey
                    
                            * Researchers
                    

Researchers

                    
                                                  * Submit your paper
                              * Find books & journals
                              * Visit Author Hub
                              * Visit Editor Hub
                              * Visit Librarian Hub
                              * Visit Reviewer Hub
                    
                            * About Elsevier
                    

About Elsevier

                    
                                                  * About
                              * Careers
                              * Newsroom
                              * Events
                              * Publisher relations
                              * Advertising, reprints and supplements
                    
                            * How can we help?
                    

How can we help?

                    
                                                  * Support and Contact
                    

Follow Elsevier

![Icon social media

facebook](https://cdn.elsevier.io/verona/includes/svg/icon-social-

facebook.svg) ![Icon social media

linkedin](https://cdn.elsevier.io/verona/includes/svg/icon-social-

linkedin.svg) ![Icon social media

twitter](https://cdn.elsevier.io/verona/includes/svg/icon-social-twitter.svg)
![Icon social media youtube](https://cdn.elsevier.io/verona/includes/svg/icon-

social-youtube.svg)

Select location/language

                    
                                                * Global English
                              * Global English
                              * United Kingdom English
                              * Poland Polski
                              * Spain Español
                              * Français France
                              * India English
                    

![Elsevier logo](https://cdn.elsevier.io/matrix/includes/svg/logo-elsevier-

wordmark.svg)

Copyright (C) 2019 Elsevier, except certain content provided by third parties

Cookies are used by this site. To decline or learn more, visit our Cookies
page.

Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Sitemap

![Elsevier logo](https://cdn.elsevier.io/matrix/includes/svg/logo-elsevier-

wordmark.svg) ![RELX

Wordmark](https://cdn.elsevier.io/matrix/includes/svg/logo-relxgroup.svg)

![RELX Wordmark](https://cdn.elsevier.io/matrix/includes/svg/logo-

relxgroup.svg)

Elsevier.com visitor survey

We are always looking for ways to improve customer experience on Elsevier.com.  
We would like to ask you for a **moment of your time** to fill in a short
questionnaire, **at the end of your visit**.

If you decide to participate, a new browser tab will open so you can complete
the survey after you have completed your visit to this website.

Thanks in advance for your time.

Accept Decline

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

