

↓

#

## Nailhead Buick

Search for:

![](http://centervilleautorepair.com/wordpress/wp-content/images/cropped-

headerwithpicL1.jpg)

Home Menu ↓

Skip to primary content

Skip to secondary content

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Buick Parts
                              * AIR CLEANERS and BREATHERS
                              * Aluminum Accessory Parts
                              * Brackets: Alternator, Generator A.C. P.S.
                              * Cam Shafts, Timing Chains
                              * Cooling System Parts
                              * Covers: Valley And Plug
                              * Covers: Valve
                              * Dampners/Balancers and Pulleys
                              * Drive Line And Differential
                              * Engine Rebuild Parts
                              * Exhaust Manifolds & Headers
                              * Flywheels & Flexplates, Flywheel Covers
                              * Fuel Pumps and Filters
                              * Gaskets & Seals
                              * Hardware, Bolts, and Studs
                              * Heating and Air Conditioning
                              * Ignition, Distributors
                              * Intakes, Carburetion
                              * Mounts: Engine & Transmission
                              * Oil Pumps, Oil Filters, Oil Pans
                              * PCV Kits, Grommits & Breathers
                              * Rocker Arms & Pushrods
                              * Starters
                              * Suspension Parts
                              * Timing Chain Covers
                              * Transmissions
                              * Transmission Adaptors & Bell Housings
                              * Valves, Valve Springs
                              * Valve Covers
                              * Valley And Plug Covers
                              * Water Pumps
                            * Tech Info
                              * How I Got Hooked on Buicks
                              * Parts is Parts?
                              * ST300 and ST400 Wiring Instructions
                              * Transmission Swaps & Modifications
                              * Nailhead Engine Swaps
                              * Nailing Down the Buick Nailhead
                              * Induction/Carburetion
                              * 15 Most Common Mistakes
                              * Nailhead Speed Secrets
                              * Cooling Problems
                              * Excessive Oil Consumption Causes
                              * Ignitions & Distributors
                              * Engine Vibration Problems
                              * Buick Camshafts
                              * Oiling Problems
                              * Rebuild or Refresh Your Engine?
                              * How to Know What Size/Year Nailhead You Are Looking At
                              * What is the Best Nailhead Engine for You?
                              * Bolts, Studs, proper placement and use
                              * Gaskets and Sealers
                              * Some Magazines/Books we have contributed to
                              * 264-322-364-401-425 bolt torque spec's
                              * Buick V8 Firing Order + Plug Wire Placement
                              * Alternator Conversion for pre-1961 Buicks
                              * 215-300-340 Tech Info
                              * How to install a rope seal correctly
                              * Fixing the Offenhauser Intakes
                              * What you get with our engine rebuilding service.
                              * Oils and Fluids
                              * Suspension
                              * Install rubber rear main seal — special instructions
                              * Newer Carburetor on 1953-1963 Buick cars with Dynaflow
                              * ST300 transmission info
                              * Upgrades and Boring Limits
                              * How to setup multiple carburetors
                              * Cylinder Head Info ..
                              * Installing An AC Compressor On Your Nailhead
                              * Should you flush your engine to remove sludge?
                              * Do I need a PCV system?
                              * Lastest Dyno Results
                            * Galleries
                              * Martin Family Rides
                              * Buick Legends and Hot Rod Heroes
                              * Customer Cars
                              * Engine Rebuilding
                              * Cool Hot Rod Ideas
                              * Pictures of Rare Buick Speed Parts
                            * Miscellaneous
                            * Caddy Hot Rod Parts
                            * About Us
                              * Our Shop & Services
                            * Customer Testimonials
                            * Contact Us
                    

# Newer Carburetor on 1953-1963 Buick cars with Dynaflow

### Newer Carburetor on 1953-1963 Buick cars with Dynaflow

Because the Dynaflow passing gear linkage attaches to the carburetor you can't
just simply bolt on a carb and have everything work (like with a PowerGluide).
The lower carburetor lever link needs to move 1 1/4" on a four barrel from
Idle to full throttle, the passing gear linkage only moves about 1/2". Buick
put a swivel on the carb that allowed this to work, it was designed to pull
the rod foreword only at the end of throttle travel. If you install a new
Edelbrock (or Holley if you don't have a better carb) you will only get half
throttle and you will be driving in passing gear all the time! We make a
linkage kit that allows the carburetor to open fully and passing gear only
works at full throttle. You can see the kit in the parts section of the
website. If you like making your own parts you can copy ours. As far as this
problem with the 1953-56 264-322, there were no passing gears until 1955, both
55 and 56 have the passing gear linkage designed to be controlled by the gas
peddle linkage and not the carburetor, you will still need to make sure you
get your passing gear engaged and carburetor fully open at the same time. The
53-56 four intakes require an adapter to use the newer 4 barrels and we have
those available. All 57-66 intakes require a heat plate to protect the
aluminum AFB and Edelbrock carburetors, check parts section. Back when I drag
raced with the Dynaflow, I had a cable to control it manually and since the
passing gear was a switch pitch convertor changing stalls gave me two low
gears and two drives.

### Dynaflow linkage instructions

The passing gear on the Dynaflow is separate from low and drive, all other
transmissions the passing gear shifts down to a lower gear. On the Dynaflow
the torque convertor changes it’s stall speed, shifting down, letting the
engine RPM to increase giving you more power. This will work in low, drive and
even reverse. On the 1957-1963 Buick's the Dynaflow passing gear linkage has a
small amount of movement compared to how far the lower lever moves on
aftermarket carburetors.. The Factory Buick carb has a lower lever that
swivels so when driving it will not go into passing gear until the gas pedal
goes to the floor. This kit replaces the swivel allowing throttle movement,
pulling it into passing gear only when floored. Without this kit you will be
in passing gear all the time and only the two primary carb barrels would open.
There are pictures in the parts section of the website to help you understand.

### Installing the new carburetor

We recommend Edelbrock or Carter 4 barrel carburetors on these engines. The
Holleys do not bolt on without an adapter and will not be as trouble free..
You will also need a heat plate that protects the carb base. Bolt the carb on,
do not hook up linkage, have someone get in the car and push the gas pedal to
the floor (engine off of course) now open the carb lever to the rear fully
open and adjust the your throttle linkage to fit. Modify if necessary to make
the rod the correct length. Next the passing gear linkage, install the stud in
the lower lever, threaded part toward carb, remove the threaded end of your
rod and install the slider part from the kit. We have included a long nut and
threaded rod if needed for correct adjustment. With carb all the way open and
passing gear linkage pulled all the way forward and adjust the linkage to fit.
Make sure there is no binding and the slider works smoothly. Move the gas
pedal several times to be 100% sure it comes all the way back. Contact us with
any questions.

### New Products

![](http://centervilleautorepair.com/wordpress/wp-content/images/flywheel-

cover-225x300.jpg)

**NEW** 1957-1965 stick shift flywheel cover, also fits Bendtsen nailhead bell
housings.

See more flywheel covers here!

![](http://centervilleautorepair.com/wordpress/wp-content/images/trans-bell-

housing.jpg)

**NEW** 4L60 trans bell housing $575.00

Fits 364-401-425

### Yes we have an EBAY store

. . . under the name BUICKRODDER ~ but please buy from us directly, you will
pay less and get the same service.

## What is a **Nailhead**?

**Nail•head [neyl-hed]:**  
A family of Buick engines that have vertical valves, a pent roof combustion
chamber. The distributors were in the rear and the starters were on the
drivers side(unlike later Buick engines), they were made from 1953 to 1966 in
264-322-364-401-425 sizes . There were other size Buick engines that resembled
nailheads like the 215 and 300 V8’s but have no parts interchangeability with
the nailhead. They are in fact related to the V6 and later Buick V8 .

There are many different parts used on the nailhead, many changes from year to
year so please state the year when asking questions and ordering parts. For
example, there are 4 different 401 engines.

### For Our Overseas Customers

Yes we sell and ship parts outside the USA to most countries but there are
certain requirements. Please know that it takes more time to communicate and
process orders and to calculate shipping cost, we always try to ship the
cheapest way.

(1) purchase must be over 100.00 not including shipping.  
(2) Paypal and credit cards excepted..  
(3) All shipped packages require a phone number with your address.

### Ordering Information

You can call us at **530-272-1564** to order an item from our catalog, or
request that we find a part for you. You can use the SEARCH function at the
top of any page to find an item.

All shipping prices listed are for the lower 48 states of the USA. We do ship
parts to Canada, most of Europe, New Zealand, and Australia.

You may notice that most used parts are not priced because our used parts
inventory changes daily. Please contact us for current prices and availability
of the part you need. We also have **many** parts that are not listed in this
website, so if you don't see what you need please ask. Thank you . . . Russ

(C) 2013 Nailhead Buick

↑

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

