

Toggle navigation

                    
                                                * EnglishEN![](/etc/designs/wbrrdesign/clientlibs-wbrredsign/img/angle-down-gray.svg)
                              * Español
                              * Français
                              * عربي
                              * Русский
                              * 中文
                              * View All »
                    

News

![The World Bank Working for a World Free of

Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wb-header-en.svg)

Toggle navigation

                    
                                                *             * Who We Are
                    

Leadership, organization, and history

                    
                                                  * ![image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/images/megamenu-whoweare.jpg)
                    

With 189 member countries, staff from more than 170 countries, and offices in
over 130 locations, the World Bank Group is a unique global partnership: five
institutions working for sustainable solutions that reduce poverty and build
shared prosperity in developing countries.

#### About the World Bank

                    
                                                    * Overview
                                * Organization
                                * Partners
                                * History
                                * World Bank Group Strategy
                                * Archives
                    

#### Accountability

                    
                                                    * Annual Reports
                                * Access to Information
                                * Corporate Scorecard
                                * Integrity Vice Presidency
                                * Inspection Panel
                                * Grievance Redress Service
                                * Independent Evaluation Group
                                * Compliance Advisor Ombudsman
                                * Policies and Procedures
                    

#### Experts And Leaders

                    
                                                    * Office of the President
                                * Boards of Governors
                                * Boards of Directors
                                * Leadership
                                * Experts
                    

* * *
                    
                                                    * News _ Arrow_
                    
                            * What We Do
                    

Projects, products, and services

                    
                                                  * ![image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/images/megamenu-whatwedo.jpg)
                    

The World Bank Group works in every major area of development. We provide a
wide array of financial products and technical assistance, and we help
countries share and apply innovative knowledge and solutions to the challenges
they face.

#### Development Projects

                    
                                                    * Projects
                                  * By Country
                                  * By Sector
                                  * By Theme
                                * Country Engagement
                                  * Environmental and Social Policies for Projects
                                  * Procurement for Projects and Programs
                                * Results
                    

#### Priorities

                    
                                                    * Human Capital Project
                                * Maximizing Finance for Development
                    

#### Knowledge

                    
                                                    * Research & Publications
                                * Data
                                * Learning
                                * Development Topics
                                * Open Knowledge Repository
                    

#### Products & Services

                    
                                                    * Financing Products & Advisory Services
                                * Treasury
                    
                            * Where We Work
                    

Countries and regions

                    
                                                  * #### Countries
                    
                                  * Afghanistan
                                  * Albania - shqip
                                  * Algeria - Français - عربي
                                  * Angola - Português
                                  * Antigua and Barbuda
                                  * Argentina - Español
                                  * Armenia
                                  * Austria
                                  * Azerbaijan
                                  * Bahrain
                                  * Bangladesh
                                  * Belarus - Русский
                                  * Belgium - Français
                                  * Belize
                                  * Benin - Français
                                  * Bhutan
                                  * Bolivia - Español
                                  * Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                  * Botswana
                                  * Brazil - Português
                                  * Bulgaria - Български
                                  * Burkina Faso - Français
                                  * Burundi - Français
                                  * Cabo Verde - Português
                                  * Cambodia - ភាសា​ខ្មែរ​
                                  * Cameroon - Français
                                  * Canada - Français
                                  * Central African Republic - Français
                                  * Chad - Français
                                  * Chile - Español
                                  * China - 中文
                                  * Colombia - Español
                                  * Comoros - Français
                                  * Democratic Republic of Congo - Français
                                  * Republic of Congo - Français
                                  * Costa Rica - Español
                                  * Cote d'Ivoire - Français
                                  * Croatia
                                  * Czech Republic
                                  * Denmark
                                  * Djibouti
                                  * Dominica
                                  * Dominican Republic - Español
                                  * Ecuador - Español
                                  * Egypt - العربية
                                  * El Salvador - Español
                                  * Equatorial Guinea
                                  * Eritrea
                                  * Estonia
                                  * Ethiopia
                                  * Europe (Western)
                                  * Fiji
                                  * Finland
                                  * France - Français
                                  * Gabon - Français
                                  * The Gambia
                                  * Georgia
                                  * Germany
                                  * Ghana
                                  * Greece
                                  * Grenada
                                  * Guatemala - Español
                                  * Guinea - Français
                                  * Guinea-Bissau - Português
                                  * Guyana
                                  * Haiti - Français
                                  * Honduras - Español
                                  * Hungary
                                  * Iceland
                                  * India - Hindi
                                  * Indonesia - Bahasa
                                  * Iran
                                  * Iraq - عربي
                                  * Israel
                                  * Italy
                                  * Jamaica
                                  * Japan - 日本語
                                  * Jordan - عربي
                                  * Kazakhstan - Русский
                                  * Kenya
                                  * Kiribati
                                  * Korea
                                  * Kosovo
                                  * Kuwait
                                  * Kyrgyz Republic - Русский
                                  * Lao PDR
                                  * Latvia
                                  * Lebanon - عربي
                                  * Lesotho
                                  * Liberia
                                  * Libya - عربي
                                  * Lithuania
                                  * Luxembourg - Français
                                  * FYR of Macedonia - македонски
                                  * Madagascar - Français
                                  * Malawi
                                  * Malaysia
                                  * Maldives
                                  * Mali - Français
                                  * Marshall Islands
                                  * Mauritania - Français
                                  * Mauritius - Français
                                  * Mexico - Español
                                  * FS Micronesia
                                  * Moldova - română
                                  * Mongolia - Монгол
                                  * Montenegro
                                  * Morocco - عربي - Français
                                  * Mozambique - Português
                                  * Myanmar
                                  * Namibia
                                  * Nepal
                                  * Netherlands
                                  * Nicaragua - Español
                                  * Niger - Français
                                  * Nigeria
                                  * Norway
                                  * Oman
                                  * Pakistan
                                  * Palau
                                  * Panama - Español
                                  * Papua New Guinea
                                  * Paraguay - Español
                                  * Peru - Español
                                  * Philippines
                                  * Poland - Polski
                                  * Portugal
                                  * Qatar
                                  * Romania - Română
                                  * Russia - Русский
                                  * Rwanda - Français
                                  * Samoa
                                  * Sao Tome and Principe - Português
                                  * Senegal - Français
                                  * Serbia
                                  * Seychelles - Français
                                  * Sierra Leone
                                  * Singapore
                                  * Slovak Republic
                                  * Slovenia
                                  * Solomon Islands
                                  * Somalia
                                  * South Africa
                                  * South Sudan
                                  * Spain - Español
                                  * Sri Lanka
                                  * St. Kitts and Nevis
                                  * St. Lucia
                                  * St. Vincent and Grenadines
                                  * Sudan
                                  * Suriname
                                  * Swaziland
                                  * Sweden
                                  * Switzerland
                                  * Syria - عربي
                                  * Tajikistan - Русский
                                  * Tanzania
                                  * Thailand - ภาษาไทย
                                  * Timor Leste (East Timor)
                                  * Togo - Français
                                  * Tonga
                                  * Trinidad and Tobago
                                  * Tunisia - عربي - Français
                                  * Turkey - Türkçe
                                  * Turkmenistan - Русский
                                  * Tuvalu
                                  * Uganda
                                  * Ukraine - Yкраїнський
                                  * United Arab Emirates
                                  * United Kingdom
                                  * United States of America
                                  * Uruguay - Español
                                  * Uzbekistan - Русский
                                  * Vanuatu
                                  * Venezuela - Español
                                  * Vietnam - Tiẽng Việt
                                  * West Bank and Gaza - عربي
                                  * Yemen - عربي
                                  * Zambia
                                  * Zimbabwe
                    

#### Recent Searches

#### Regions

                    
                                                    * Africa
                                * East Asia and Pacific
                                * Europe and Central Asia
                                * Latin America and Caribbean
                                * Middle East and North Africa
                                * South Asia
                    

#### Country Groups

                    
                                                    * European Union
                                * Middle Income Countries
                                * Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
                                * Pacific Islands
                                * Small States
                                * Gulf Cooperation Council
                                * Western Europe
                    
                            * Understanding Poverty
                    

Global data and statistics, research and publications, and topics in poverty
and development

                    
                                                  * ![image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/images/megamenu-photo-pakistan.jpg)
                    

We face big challenges to help the world’s poorest people and ensure that
everyone sees benefits from economic growth. Data and research help us
understand these challenges and set priorities, share knowledge of what works,
and measure progress.

#### Data & Research

                    
                                                    * Open Data
                                  * By Country
                                  * By Indicator
                                * Research & Publications
                    

#### Development Topics

                    
                                                    * Climate Change
                                * Education
                                * Energy
                                * Fragility, Conflict and Violence
                    
                                  * Poverty
                                  * Urban Development
                                  * Trade
                                  * Health
                                * All Development Topics _ Arrow_
                    

* * *
                    
                                                * Work With Us
                    

Jobs, procurement, training, and events

                    
                                                  * #### For Job Seekers
                    
                                * Jobs
                                * Programs & Internships
                    

#### For Partners

                    
                                                    * Partners
                                * Clients
                                * Private Sector
                                * Corporate Procurement 
                                * Civil Society
                                * Consultations
                                * Parliamentarians
                    

#### For Investors

                    
                                                    * World Bank Bonds & Investment Products
                                * Treasury
                    

#### For Learners

                    
                                                    * Open Learning Campus
                    

#### Meet Us

                    
                                                    * Events
                                * World Bank Live
                                * Speaker's Bureau
                                * Spring & Annual Meetings
                    

* * *

* * *
                    
                                                    * Contacts & Inquiries _ Arrow_
                    
                            * ![Search](/etc/designs/wbrrdesign/clientlibs-wbrredsign/img/search-orange.svg) X
                              * ## Search
                    
                            1. Who We Are
                            2. News
                    
                            * This page in:  EN  _dropdown_
                    
                            * Español
                            * Français
                            * العربية
                            * Русский
                    

This page in:_

                    
                                                * English
                            * Español
                            * Français
                            * العربية
                            * Русский
                          1. _dropdown_
                    

June 29, 2017

# Solar Powers India’s Clean Energy Revolution

# Solar Powers India’s Clean Energy Revolution

###

Over 450 million ceiling fans are in use and 40 million sold each year, but
240 million people still have no legal electricity connection. Demand for
electricity is growing at the same rate as in France or Germany as millions of
people in rural or impoverished areas seek access to power in their homes and
workplaces.

What if India planned to meet that need with energy sources like coal?

It isn’t. In fact, the country is focused on just the opposite.

With a sweeping commitment to solar power,, India is emerging as a front
runner in the global fight against climate change.

That’s good news, because if the world expects to reach its Paris Climate
Agreement objective of containing global warming to under a 2-degrees Celsius
increase, it is imperative for India – the third largest emitter of carbon
dioxide -- to be a global leader on renewable energy.

##

###

The World Bank is committed to supporting India’s solar energy push. ,
starting with a Grid Connected Rooftop Solar project that aims to put solar
panels on rooftops across the country, and 100MW of energy has already been
financed through this project. Exactly a year ago, on June 30, 2016, the
institution signed an agreement with the International Solar Alliance (ISA),
consisting of 121 countries led by India, to collaborate on increasing solar
energy use around the world and mobilize $1 trillion in investments by 2030.

With its conscious choice to use significantly more clean energy to fuel its
growth, India is contributing to global efforts to save the planet from the
effects of climate change **.** Just a few weeks ago, the country also walked
away from plans to install nearly 14 GW of coal-fired power plants, largely
because it is as affordable now to generate electricity with solar power as it
is to use fossil fuels.

##

###

**Solar as a solution**

The cost of electricity from solar photovoltaic (PV) is currently a quarter of
what it was in 2009 and is set to fall another 66% by 2040. That means, .

With nearly 300 days of sunshine every year, Clearly, the market agrees, as is
evident from the significant drop in the cost of solar power. In its latest
solar auction, the country achieved a record low tariff of INR 2.44/unit (4
cents/unit) for a project in the desert state of Rajasthan.

The Indian government is setting ambitious targets that include 160 gigawatts
(GW) of wind and solar by 2022. Not only will this help hundreds of million
people light their homes it will also enable children to study at night,
provide families with refrigerators to preserve their food or TVs to entertain
themselves after a long day of work. It is also an incentive for international
firms to invest in India’s solar market.

, innovative solutions to store solar power and support for mini grids. The
institution’s backing will increase the availability of private financing,
introduce new technologies, and enable the development of common
infrastructure to support privately developed solar parks across India.

“The World Bank financing, routed through State Bank of India (SBI), is the
first time that a dedicated institutional financing has been made available
for rooftop solar power plants,” Sanjeev Aggarwal, Founder and MD& CEO of
Amplus Solar. “This financing will help in expeditious adoption of distributed
solar by Indian consumers and will act as a significant catalyst for the
growth of the rooftop solar sector in India. We will continue to work with
World Bank and SBI to create innovative credit structures so that benefits of
this attractive financing scheme will reach the maximum number of consumers.”

![Image](/content/dam/infographics/780xany/2017/may/India.gif)

_Explore the_ _India nightlights website_.

**Lighting innovations**

In turning to solar, India has sought creative solutions to challenges such as
limited land availability to host solar panels for a rapidly growing
population. It must go beyond what Morocco has done, for instance, with its
concentrated solar power that requires large tracts of land to set up giant
mirrors and lenses. So, in addition to its solar parks, India is installing
solar panels on rooftops and floating solar platforms on rivers and other
bodies of water. It also has ambitious plans to only sell electric cars by
2030.

Still, is that enough?

India’s greenhouse gas emissions are predicted to keep increasing at least
until 2030 – something it is working hard to change with serious energy
efficiency measures.

The Bank is also supporting India’s UJALA program, through which the country
has distributed more than 241 million LED bulbs, making it the largest and the
first zero-subsidy national LED lighting program in the world. Residential
consumers can get LED bulbs from UJALA distribution centers or through
participating retailers and pay upfront or in smaller installments, which make
the bulbs more accessible for poorer customers.

The program has helped save more than 6,000 MW of energy and resulted in a
25-million ton reduction in CO2 emissions per year. India plans to replace all
of its 770 million incandescent bulbs with LEDs by 2019.

Other countries in the region are also adopting clean energy measures with
support from the Bank.

**Regional Advances**

Take **Pakistan** , for instance. Recognizing the potential of solar energy in
the country, the Bank is helping map the country’s annual average solar power
potential with a free, web-based app that has the capacity to zoom into areas
with a spatial resolution of 1 km, or 0.6 of a mile. The tool provides access
to high resolution global and regional maps and geographic information system
(GIS) data, providing investors and solar developers with an easily accessible
and uniform platform to compare resource potential between sites in one region
or across multiple countries.

The Bank is also working with Pakistan on the Dasu Hydropower Project, which
aims to improve the country’s energy security through the use of more low-
carbon energy sources and make electricity access more affordable and prevent
frequent blackouts for millions of consumers, including industry, households
and farmers.

And , making it the largest program of its kind in the world. The country is
also turning to standalone solar mini-grids to power up small businesses and
homes in remote areas that the electricity grid does not reach, helping women
like Lota Khatun earn an income.

Khatun lives with her family on the remote island of Monpura, which is served
by a solar mini-grid. She now has electricity at night, and runs a sewing
business from home.

“When we got solar, I bought this (sewing) machine,” Khatun said. “Now that we
have light at night, I can sew at night.”

##

###

India’s efforts demonstrate its serious commitment to mitigate climate change.
But more has to happen for millions of the country’s citizens to have some of
the basic conveniences that electricity provides.

“I have on more occasions than one discussed with world leaders that it's time
that the world collectively decides that wherever technologies are focused
towards a safer planet, we must try and make it open access… make it available
to the whole world, so that we can encourage clean energy (and) sustainability
while making it more affordable,” said Piyush Goyal, India’s Minister of State
with Independent Charge for Power, Coal, New and Renewable Energy and Mines,
at a recent event in Vienna.

“If we believe in it, and we work towards it collectively, all of us can make
a difference.”

#### RELATED

The Bigger Picture: In-depth stories on ending poverty

                    
                                                * About
                            * Data
                            * Research and Publications
                            * Learning
                    
                            * News
                            * Projects and Operations
                            * Countries
                            * Topics
                    

* * *

#### follow us

                    
                                                * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/fb.svg)
                            * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/twitter.svg)
                            * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/linkedln.svg)
                            * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/instagram.svg)
                            * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/youtube.svg)
                            * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/flickr.svg)
                    

#### newsletter

This Site in:

                    
                                                * English ![](/etc/designs/wbr/clientlibs-beta/img/angle-down.svg)
                              * Español
                              * Français
                              * عربي
                              * Русский
                              * 中文
                              * View All »
                    
                            * Legal Access to Information Jobs Contact
                    

REPORT FRAUD OR CORRUPTION

                    
                                                * ![The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/logos/logo-wbg-footer-en.svg)
                            * IBRD IDA IFC MIGA ICSID
                    

© The World Bank Group, All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

