

# Sex-selective abortion

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ac/2012_Birth_Sex_Ratio_World_Map.jpg/300px-2012_Birth_Sex_Ratio_World_Map.jpg)

World map of birth sex ratios, 2012

## Part of a series on

Discrimination

General forms

  * Age
  * Caste
  * Class
  * Color
  * Disability
  * Genotype
  * Hair texture
  * Height
  * Language
  * Looks
  * Mental condition
  * Race / Ethnicity / Nationality
  * Rank
  * Religion
  * Sex
  * Sexual orientation
  * Size
  * Species

Specific forms

Social

  * Acephobia
  * AIDS stigma
  * Adultism
  * Anti-albinism
  * Anti-autism
  * Anti-homelessness
  * Anti-intellectualism
  * Anti-intersex
  * Anti-left handedness
  * Anti-Masonry
  * Antisemitism (Judeophobia)
  * Aporophobia
  * Audism
  * Biphobia
  * Clannism
  * Cronyism
  * Drug use
  * Elitism
  * Ephebiphobia
  * Fatism
  * Gerontophobia
  * Heteronormativity
  * Heterosexism
  * Homophobia
  * Leprosy stigma
  * Lesbophobia
  * Misandry
  * Misogyny
  * Nepotism
  * Pedophobia
  * Pregnancy
  * Reverse
  * Sectarianism
  * Sexism
  * Shadeism
  * Supremacism
    * Black
    * White
  * Transphobia
    * Non-binary
    * Transmisogyny
  * Vegaphobia
  * Xenophobia

Religious

  * Ahmadiyya
  * Atheism
  * Bahá'í Faith
  * Buddhism
  * Catholicism
  * Christianity
    * Modern
  * Hinduism
    * Persecution
  * Falun Gong
  * Islam
    * Persecution
  * Judaism
    * Persecution
  * Jehovah's Witnesses
  * LDS or Mormon
  * Neopaganism
  * Eastern Orthodox
  * Oriental Orthodox
  * Rastafarianism
  * Protestantism
  * Shia
  * Sufism
  * Zoroastrianism

Ethnic/National

  * Albanian
  * African
  * American
  * Arab
  * Armenian
  * Australian
  * Austrian
  * British
  * Canadian
  * Catalan
  * Chilean
  * Croat
  * Chinese
  * Dutch
  * English
  * Estonian
  * European
  * Filipino
  * Finnish
  * French
  * German
  * Greek
  * Haitian
  * Hazara
  * Hindus
  * Hispanic
  * Hungarian
  * Igbo
  * Indian
  * Iranian or Persian
  * Irish
  * Israeli
  * Italian
  * Japanese
  * Jewish
  * Khmer
  * Korean
  * Kurds
  * Malay
  * Mexican
  * Middle Eastern
  * Mongolian
  * Pakistani
  * Pashtun
  * Polish
  * Portuguese
  * Quebec
  * Romani
  * Romanian
  * Russian
  * Scottish
  * Serb
  * Slav
  * Somali
  * Soviet
  * Thai
  * Turks
  * Ukrainian
  * Vietnamese
  * Western

Manifestations

  * Animal cruelty
  * Animal industrial complex
  * Animal testing
  * Blood libel
  * Blood sport
  * Carnism
  * Compulsory sterilization
  * Counter-jihad
  * Cultural genocide
  * Democide
  * Disability hate crime
  * Educational
  * Economic
  * Eliminationism
  * Employment
  * Enemy of the people
  * Ethnic cleansing
  * Ethnic hatred
  * Ethnic joke
  * Ethnocide
  * Forced conversion
  * Freak show
  * Gay bashing
  * Gendercide
  * Genital mutilation
  * Genocide
    * examples
  * Glass ceiling
  * Group libel
  * Hate crime
  * Hate group
  * Hate speech
  * Homeless dumping
  * Housing
  * Indian rolling
  * LGBT hate crime
  * Lavender scare
  * Lynching
  * Meat eating
  * Mortgage
  * Murder music
  * Occupational segregation
  * Persecution
  * Pogrom
  * Purge
  * Race war
  * Red Scare
  * Religious persecution
  * Scapegoating
  * Segregation academy
  * Sex-selective abortion
  * Slavery
  * Slut-shaming
  * Religious terrorism
  * Religious violence
  * Religious war
  * Trans bashing
  * Victimisation
  * Violence against women
  * White flight
  * White power music
  * Wife selling
  * Witch-hunt

Policies

  * Segregation
    * age
    * racial
    * religious
    * sexual
  * Age of candidacy
  * Blood purity
  * Blood quantum
  * Crime of apartheid
  * Disabilities
    * Jewish
    * Catholic
  * Ethnocracy
  * Ethnopluralism
  * Gender pay gap
  * Gender roles
  * Gerontocracy
  * Gerrymandering
  * Ghetto benches
  * Internment
  * Jewish quota
  * Jim Crow laws
  * Law for Protection of the Nation
  * McCarthyism
  * MSM blood donor controversy
  * Nonpersons
  * _Numerus clausus_ (as religious or racial quota)
  * Nuremberg Laws
  * One-drop rule
  * Racial quota
  * Racial steering
  * Redlining
  * Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting)
  * State atheism
  * State religion
  * Sodomy law
  * Ugly law
  * Voter suppression

Countermeasures

  * Affirmative action
  * Animal rights
  * Anti-discrimination law
  * Cultural assimilation
  * Cultural pluralism
  * Diversity training
  * Empowerment
  * Feminism
  * Fighting Discrimination
  * Human rights
  * Intersex rights
  * LGBT rights
  * Masculism
  * Multiculturalism
  * Nonviolence
  * Racial integration
  * Self-determination
  * Social integration
  * Toleration
  * Vegetarianism
  * Veganism

Related topics

  * Allophilia
  * Anthropocentrism
  * Anti-cultural sentiment
  * Assimilation
  * Bias
  * Christian privilege
  * Data discrimination
  * Dehumanization
  * Diversity
  * Ethnic penalty
  * Eugenics
  * Intersectionality
  * Madonna–whore complex
  * Male privilege
  * Masculism
  * Multiculturalism
  * Neurodiversity
  * Oikophobia
  * Oppression
  * Police brutality
  * Political correctness
  * Polyculturalism
  * Power distance
  * Prejudice
  * Racial bias in criminal news
  * Racism by country
  * Religious intolerance
  * Second-generation gender bias
  * Snobbery
  * Social exclusion
  * Social stigma
  * Stereotype
    * threat
  * White privilege

  * v

  * t
  * e

**Sex-selective abortion** is the practice of terminating a pregnancy based
upon the predicted sex of the infant. The selective abortion of female fetuses
is most common where male children are valued over female children, especially
in parts of East Asia and South Asia (particularly in countries such as
People's Republic of China, India and Pakistan), as well as in the Caucasus,
and Western Balkans.[1][2][3]

Sex selective abortion was first documented in 1975,[4] and became commonplace
by the late 1980s in South Korea and China and around the same time or
slightly later in India.

Sex-selective abortion effects the human sex ratio—the relative number of
males to females in a given age group,[5][6] with China and India, the two
most populous countries of the world, having unbalanced gender ratios. Studies
and reports focusing on sex-selective abortion are predominantly statistical;
they assume that birth sex ratio—the overall ratio of boys and girls at
birth—for a regional population is an indicator of sex-selective abortion.
This assumption has been questioned by some scholars.[7]

According to demographic scholarship, the expected birth sex ratio range is
103 to 107 males to 100 females at birth.[8][9]

## Contents

  * 1 Human sex ratio at birth
    * 1.1 High or low human sex ratio implies sex-selective abortion
    * 1.2 High or low human sex ratio may be natural
    * 1.3 Data on human sex ratio at birth
    * 1.4 Data reliability
  * 2 Prenatal sex discernment
  * 3 Prevalence
  * 4 Asia
    * 4.1 China
    * 4.2 India
    * 4.3 Other Asian countries
  * 5 Europe
    * 5.1 Caucasus
    * 5.2 Southeast Europe
  * 6 United States
  * 7 Other countries
  * 8 Estimates of missing women
  * 9 Disparate gendered access to resources
  * 10 Reasons for sex-selective abortion
    * 10.1 Cultural preference
    * 10.2 Dowry
    * 10.3 One-child policy
    * 10.4 Trivers–Willard hypothesis
  * 11 Societal effects
    * 11.1 Missing women
    * 11.2 Trafficking, forced marriage and sex work
    * 11.3 Widening of the gender social gap
    * 11.4 Potential positive effects
    * 11.5 Controversies
  * 12 Sex-selective abortion in the context of abortion
  * 13 Laws, campaigns and policies against sex-selective abortion
    * 13.1 International
    * 13.2 By country
  * 14 See also
  * 15 References
  * 16 External links

## Human sex ratio at birth[edit]

Main article: Human sex ratio

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a5/Abortion_Laws.svg/400px-

Abortion_Laws.svg.png)

The human sex ratio at birth can vary for natural reasons as well as from sex-
selective abortion. In many nations abortion is legal (see above map, dark
blue).

Sex-selective abortion affects the human sex ratio—the relative number of
males to females in a given age group.[5] Studies and reports that discuss
sex-selective abortion are based on the assumption that birth sex ratio—the
overall ratio of boys and girls at birth for a regional population, is an
indicator of sex-selective abortion.[7][10]

The natural human sex ratio at birth was estimated, in a 2002 study, to be
close to 106 boys to 100 girls.[11] Human sex ratio at birth that is
significantly different from 106 is often assumed to be correlated to the
prevalence and scale of sex-selective abortion. Countries considered to have
significant practices of sex-selective abortion are those with birth sex
ratios of 108 and above (selective abortion of females), and 102 and below
(selective abortion of males).[8] This assumption is controversial, and the
subject of continuing scientific studies.

### High or low human sex ratio implies sex-selective abortion[edit]

One school of scholars suggest that any birth sex ratio of boys to girls that
is outside of the normal 105–107 range, necessarily implies sex-selective
abortion. These scholars[12] claim that both the sex ratio at birth and the
population sex ratio are remarkably constant in human populations. Significant
deviations in birth sex ratios from the normal range can only be explained by
manipulation, that is sex-selective abortion.[13]

In a widely cited article,[14] Amartya Sen compared the birth sex ratio in
Europe (106) and United States (105) with those in Asia (107+) and argued that
the high sex ratios in East Asia, West Asia and South Asia may be due to
excessive female mortality. Sen pointed to research that had shown that if men
and women receive similar nutritional and medical attention and good health
care then females have better survival rates, and it is the male which is the
genetically fragile sex.[9]

Sen estimated 'missing women' from extra women who would have survived in Asia
if it had the same ratio of women to men as Europe and United States.
According to Sen, the high birth sex ratio over decades, implies a female
shortfall of 11% in Asia, or over 100 million women as missing from the 3
billion combined population of South Asia, West Asia, North Africa and China.

### High or low human sex ratio may be natural[edit]

Other scholars question whether birth sex ratio outside 103–107 can be due to
natural reasons. William James and others[7][15] suggest that conventional
assumptions have been:

  * there are equal numbers of X and Y chromosomes in mammalian sperms
  * X and Y stand equal chance of achieving conception
  * therefore equal number of male and female zygotes are formed, and that
  * therefore any variation of sex ratio at birth is due to sex selection between conception and birth.

James cautions that available scientific evidence stands against the above
assumptions and conclusions. He reports that there is an excess of males at
birth in almost all human populations, and the natural sex ratio at birth is
usually between 102 and 108. However the ratio may deviate significantly from
this range for natural reasons such as early marriage and fertility, teenage
mothers, average maternal age at birth, paternal age, age gap between father
and mother, late births, ethnicity, social and economic stress, warfare,
environmental and hormonal effects.[7][16] This school of scholars support
their alternate hypothesis with historical data when modern sex-selection
technologies were unavailable, as well as birth sex ratio in sub-regions, and
various ethnic groups of developed economies.[17][18] They suggest that direct
abortion data should be collected and studied, instead of drawing conclusions
indirectly from human sex ratio at birth.

James' hypothesis is supported by historical birth sex ratio data before
technologies for ultrasonographic sex-screening were discovered and
commercialized in the 1960s and 1970s, as well by reverse abnormal sex ratios
currently observed in Africa. Michel Garenne reports that many African nations
have, over decades, witnessed birth sex ratios below 100, that is more girls
are born than boys.[19] Angola, Botswana and Namibia have reported birth sex
ratios between 94 and 99, which is quite different than the presumed 104 to
106 as natural human birth sex ratio.[20]

John Graunt noted that in London over a 35-year period in the 17th century
(1628–62),[21] the birth sex ratio was 1.07; while Korea's historical records
suggest a birth sex ratio of 1.13, based on 5 million births, in 1920s over a
10-year period.[22] Other historical records from Asia too support James'
hypothesis. For example, Jiang et al. claim that the birth sex ratio in China
was 116–121 over a 100-year period in the late 18th and early 19th centuries;
in the 120–123 range in the early 20th century; falling to 112 in the
1930s.[23][24]

### Data on human sex ratio at birth[edit]

In the United States, the sex ratios at birth over the period 1970–2002 were
105 for the white non-Hispanic population, 104 for Mexican Americans, 103 for
African Americans and Native Americans, and 107 for mothers of Chinese or
Filipino ethnicity.[25] Among Western European countries c. 2001, the ratios
ranged from 104 to 107.[26][27][28] In the aggregated results of 56
Demographic and Health Surveys[29] in African countries, the birth sex ratio
was found to be 103, though there is also considerable country-to-country, and
year-to-year variation.[30]

In a 2005 study, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services reported sex
ratio at birth in the United States from 1940 over 62 years.[31] This
statistical evidence suggested the following: For mothers having their first
baby, the total sex ratio at birth was 106 overall, with some years at 107.
For mothers having babies after the first, this ratio consistently decreased
with each additional baby from 106 towards 103. The age of the mother affected
the ratio: the overall ratio was 105 for mothers aged 25 to 35 at the time of
birth; while mothers who were below the age of 15 or above 40 had babies with
a sex ratio ranging between 94 and 111, and a total sex ratio of 104. This
United States study also noted that American mothers of Hawaiian, Filipino,
Chinese, Cuban and Japanese ethnicity had the highest sex ratio, with years as
high as 114 and average sex ratio of 107 over the 62-year study period.
Outside of United States, European nations with extensive birth records, such
as Finland, report similar variations in birth sex ratios over a 250-year
period, that is from 1751 to 1997 AD.[18]

In 2017, according to CIA estimates,[32] the countries with the highest birth
sex ratio were Liechtenstein (125), Northern Mariana Islands (116), China
(114), Armenia (112), Falkland Islands (112), India (112), Grenada (110), Hong
Kong (110), Vietnam (110), Albania (109), Azerbaijan (109), San Marino (109),
Isle of Man (108), Kosovo (108) and Macedonia (108). Also in 2017 the lowest
ratio (ie. more girls born) was in Nauru at (0.83).[32] There were ratios of
102 and below in several countries, most of them African countries or
Black/African majority population Caribbean countries: Angola, Aruba,
Barbados, Bermuda, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Cayman
Islands, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Republic of the Congo, Cote
d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Kazakhstan, Leshoto, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Puerto Rico, Qatar, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, South Africa, Togo, Uganda, Zambia.[32]

There is controversy about the notion of the exact natural sex ratio at birth.
In a study around 2002, the natural sex ratio at birth was estimated to be
close to 1.06 males/female.[33] There is controversy whether sex ratios
outside the 103-107 range are due to sex-selection, as suggested by some
scholars, or due to natural causes. The claims that unbalanced sex ratios are
necessary due to sex selection have been questioned by some researchers.[7]
Some researchers argue that an unbalanced sex ratio should not be
automatically held as evidence of prenatal sex-selection; Michel Garenne
reports that many African nations have, over decades, witnessed birth sex
ratios below 100, that is more girls are born than boys.[19] Angola, Botswana
and Namibia have reported birth sex ratios between 94 and 99, which is quite
different than the presumed "normal" sex ratio, meaning that significantly
more girls have been born in such societies.[20]

In addition, in many developing countries there are problems with birth
registration and data collection, which can complicate the issue.[34] With
regard to the prevalence of sex selection, the media and international
attention has focused mainly on a few countries, such as China, India and the
Caucasus, ignoring other countries with a significant sex imbalance at birth.
For example, Liechtenstein's sex ratio is far worse than that of those
countries, but little has been discussed about it, and virtually no
suggestions have been made that it may practice sex selection, although it is
a very conservative country where women could not vote until 1984.[35][36] At
the same time, there have been accusations that the situation in some
countries, such as Georgia, has been exaggerated.[37] In 2017, Georgia' sex
ratio at birth was 107, according to CIA statistics.[38]

### Data reliability[edit]

The estimates for birth sex ratios, and thus derived sex-selective abortion,
are a subject of dispute as well. For example, United States' CIA projects[39]
the birth sex ratio for Switzerland to be 106, while the Switzerland's Federal
Statistical Office that tracks actual live births of boys and girls every
year, reports the latest birth sex ratio for Switzerland as 107.[40] Other
variations are more significant; for example, CIA projects[39] the birth sex
ratio for Pakistan to be 105, United Nations FPA office claims[41] the birth
sex ratio for Pakistan to be 110, while the government of Pakistan claims its
average birth sex ratio is 111.[42][43]

The two most studied nations with high sex ratio and sex-selective abortion
are China and India. The CIA estimates[39] a birth sex ratio of 112 for both
in recent years. However, The World Bank claims the birth sex ratio for China
in 2009 was 120 boys for every 100 girls;[44] while United Nations FPA
estimates China's 2011 birth sex ratio to be 118.[45]

For India, the United Nations FPA claims a birth sex ratio of 111 over 2008–10
period,[45] while The World Bank and India's official 2011 Census reports a
birth sex ratio of 108.[46][47] These variations and data reliability is
important as a rise from 108 to 109 for India, or 117 to 118 for China, each
with large populations, represent a possible sex-selective abortion of about
100,000 girls.

## Prenatal sex discernment[edit]

Main article: Prenatal sex discernment

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4b/Sex_determination_ban.JPG/220px-

Sex_determination_ban.JPG)

Sign in an Indian hospital stating that prenatal sex determination is not done
there and is illegal

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a1/Boy.JPG/220px-Boy.JPG)

Ultrasonography image showing the fetus is a boy

The earliest post-implantation test, cell free fetal DNA testing, involves
taking a blood sample from the mother and isolating the small amount of fetal
DNA that can be found within it. When performed after week seven of pregnancy,
this method is about 98% accurate.[48][49]

Obstetric ultrasonography, either transvaginally or transabdominally, checks
for various markers of fetal sex. It can be performed at or after week 12 of
pregnancy. At this point, ​3⁄4 of fetal sexes can be correctly determined,
according to a 2001 study.[50] Accuracy for males is approximately 50% and for
females almost 100%. When performed after week 13 of pregnancy,
ultrasonography gives an accurate result in almost 100% of cases.[50]

The most invasive measures are chorionic villus sampling (CVS) and
amniocentesis, which involve testing of the chorionic villus (found in the
placenta) and amniotic fluid, respectively. Both techniques typically test for
chromosomal disorders but can also reveal the sex of the child and are
performed early in the pregnancy. However, they are often more expensive and
more dangerous than blood sampling or ultrasonography, so they are seen less
frequently than other sex determination techniques.[51]

Prenatal sex determination is restricted in many countries, and so is the
communication of the sex of the fetus to the pregnant woman or her family, in
order to prevent sex selective abortion. In India, prenatal sex determination
is regulated under the Pre-conception and Prenatal Diagnostic Techniques
(Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act 1994.[52]

Availability

China launched its first ultrasonography machine in 1979.[10] Chinese health
care clinics began introducing ultrasound technologies that could be used to
determine prenatal sex in 1982. By 1991, Chinese companies were producing
5,000 ultrasonography machines per year. Almost every rural and urban hospital
and family planning clinics in China had a good quality sex discernment
equipment by 2001.[53]

The launch of ultrasonography technology in India too occurred in 1979, but
its expansion was slower than China. Ultrasound sex discernment technologies
were first introduced in major cities of India in the 1980s, its use expanded
in India's urban regions in the 1990s, and became widespread in the 2000s.[54]

## Prevalence[edit]

The exact prevalence of sex-selective abortion is uncertain, with the practice
taking place in some societies as an open secret, without formal data on its
frequency. Some authors argue that it is quite difficult to explain why this
practice takes place in some cultures and not others, and that sex-selective
abortion cannot be explained merely by patriarchal social norms, because most
societies are male dominated, but only a minority practice sex-selective
abortion.[55]

## Asia[edit]

The vast majority of sex-selective abortions take place in China and India,
with 11.9 million and 10.6 million, respectively, out of 23 million world-
wide, according to a 2019 study.[56]

### China[edit]

Further information: Missing women of China, Female infanticide in China, and
List of Chinese administrative divisions by gender ratio

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/87/G106-Dajipu-to-Daye-

hills-0068.jpg/250px-G106-Dajipu-to-Daye-hills-0068.jpg)

A roadside slogan calls motorists to crack down on medically unnecessary
antenatal sex identification and sex-selective pregnancy termination
practices. (Daye, Hubei, 2008)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4e/PRC_family_planning_don%27t_abandon_girls.jpg/250px-

PRC_family_planning_don%27t_abandon_girls.jpg)

Roadside sign in Danshan Township, which reads "It is forbidden to
discriminate against, mistreat or abandon baby girls"

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b9/Chinese_anti_infanticide_tract_from_1800.jpg/250px-

Chinese_anti_infanticide_tract_from_1800.jpg)

Chinese anti infanticide tract circa 1800. China has a long history of female
infanticide.

China, the most populous country in the world, has a serious problem with an
unbalanced sex ratio population. A 2010 BBC article stated that the sex birth
ratio was 119 boys born per 100 girls, which rose to 130 boys per 100 girls in
some rural areas.[57] The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences estimated that
more than 24 million Chinese men of marrying age could find themselves without
spouses by 2020.[57] In 1979, China enacted the one child policy, which,
within the country's deeply patriarchal culture, resulted in an unbalanced
birth sex ratio. The one child policy was enforced very aggressively
throughout the years, including through forced abortions and forced
sterilizations, but it has been gradually loosened in recent years, and
formally abolished in 2015.[58] China's strong son preference is well
documented in documentaries such as _The Dying Rooms_ (1995) and _It's a Girl:
The Three Deadliest Words in the World_ (2012).

When sex ratio began being studied in China in 1960, it was still within the
normal range. However, it climbed to 111.9 by 1990[10] and to 118 by 2010 per
its official census.[59][60] Researchers believe that the causes of this sex
ratio imbalance are increased female infant mortality, underreporting of
female births and sex-selective abortion. According to Zeng et al. (1993), the
most prominent cause is probably sex-selective abortion, but this is difficult
to prove that in a country with little reliable birth data because of the
hiding of "illegal" (under the One-Child Policy) births.[61]

These illegal births have led to underreporting of female infants. Zeng et
al., using a reverse survival method, estimate that underreporting keeps about
2.26% male births and 5.94% female births off the books. Adjusting for
unreported illegal births, they conclude that the corrected Chinese sex ratio
at birth for 1989 was 111 rather than 115.[61] These national averages over
time, mask the regional sex ratio data. For example, in some provinces such as
Anhui, Jiangxi, Shaanxi, Hunan and Guangdong, sex ratio at birth is more than
130.[62][63]

Traditional Chinese techniques have been used to determine sex for hundreds of
years, primarily with unknown accuracy. It was not until ultrasonography
became widely available in urban and rural China that sex was able to be
determined scientifically. In 1986, the Ministry of Health posted the Notice
on Forbidding Prenatal Sex Determination, but it was not widely followed.[64]
Three years later, the Ministry of Health outlawed the use of sex
determination techniques, except for in diagnosing hereditary diseases.[65]

However, many people have personal connections to medical practitioners and
strong son preference still dominates culture, leading to the widespread use
of sex determination techniques.[10] According to Hardy, Gu, and Xie (2000),
ultrasound has spread to all areas of China, as evidenced by the spread of the
high sex ratio throughout the country.[66]

Hardy, Gu, and Xie suggest sex-selective abortion is more prevalent in rural
China because son preference is much stronger there.[66] Urban areas of China,
on average, are moving toward greater equality for both sexes, while rural
China tends to follow more traditional views of gender. This is partially due
to the belief that, while sons are always part of the family, daughters are
only temporary, going to a new family when they marry. Additionally, if a
woman's firstborn child is a son, her position in society moves up, while the
same is not true of a firstborn daughter.[10]

In the past, desire for a son was manifested by large birth rates—many couples
would continue to have children until they had a son.[10] However, the
combination of financial concerns and, more importantly, the One-child policy
(discussed further below) have led to an increase in gender planning and
selection. Even in rural areas, most women know that ultrasonography can be
used for gender discernment. For each subsequent birth, Junhong found that
women are over 10% more likely to have an ultrasound (39% for firstborn, 55%
for second born, 67% for third born). Additionally, he found that the sex of
the firstborn child impacts whether a woman will have an ultrasound in her
subsequent pregnancies: 40% of women with a firstborn son have an ultrasound
for their second born child, versus 70% of women with firstborn daughters.
This points to a strong desire to select for a son if one has not been born
yet.[10]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ae/Sex_ratio_at_birth_in_mainland_China.png/450px-

Sex_ratio_at_birth_in_mainland_China.png)

Birth sex ratios have dramatically changed in China since the implementation
of the One-Child Policy.

Because of the lack of data about childbirth, a number of researchers have
worked to learn about abortion statistics in China. One of the earliest
studies by Qui (1987) found that according to cultural belief, fetuses are not
thought of as human beings until they are born, leading to a cultural
preference for abortion over infanticide.[67] In fact, infanticide and infant
abandonment are rather rare in China today.[10] Instead, Junhong found that
roughly 27% of women have an abortion. Additionally, he found that if a
family's firstborn was a girl, 92% of known female would-be second born
fetuses were aborted.[68]

In a 2005 study, Zhu, Lu, and Hesketh found that the highest sex ratio was for
those ages 1–4, and two provinces, Tibet and Xinjiang, had sex ratios within
normal limits. Two other provinces had a ratio over 140, four had ratios
between 130–139, and seven had ratios between 120–129, each of which is
significantly higher than the natural sex ratio.[63]

Variance in the one child policy has led to three types of provinces. Zhu et
al. call Type 1, the most restrictive, policy where 40% of couples are
permitted to have a second child but generally only if the first is a girl. In
Type 2 provinces, any couple is permitted to have a second child if the first
born is a girl or if the parents petition “hardship” and the petition is
accepted by local officials. Type 3 provinces, typically sparsely populated,
allow couples a second child and sometimes a third, irrespective of sex. Zhu
et al. find that Type 2 provinces have the highest birth sex ratios, as seen
in Henan, Anhui, Jiangxi, Hunan, Guangdong, and Hainan.[63][69]

High sex ratio trends in China is projected, by 2020, to create a pool of 55
million excess young adult men than women.[70] According to Junhong, many
males between the ages of 28 and 49 are unable to find a partner and thus
remain unmarried. Families in China are aware of the critical lack of female
children and its implication on marriage prospects in the future; many parents
are beginning to work extra when their sons are young so that they will be
able to pay for a bride for them.[10]

The birth sex ratio in China, according to a 2012 news report, has decreased
to 117 males born for every 100 females.[71]

The ratios in China vary greatly by region, as can be seen below. The figures
are from the intercensus survey of 2005, which was carried out in November
2005 on a representative 1% of the total population.[72]

Rank | Name | Boys for Every 100 Girls  
---|---|---  
1 | Jiangxi | 143  
2 | Henan | 142  
3 | Anhui | 138  
4 | Hainan | 134  
5 | Hunan | 133  
5 | Guangdong | 133  
7 | Hubei | 129  
8 | Guizhou | 127  
9 | Shaanxi | 125  
10 | Jiangsu | 123  
11 | Hebei | 122  
11 | Guangxi | 122  
13 | Gansu | 120  
14 | Fujian | 119  
14 | Chongqing | 119  
16 | Tianjin | 118  
17 | Sichuan | 116  
17 | Shandong | 116  
19 | Yunnan | 115  
20 | Liaoning | 114  
21 | Zhejiang | 113  
22 | Beijing | 112  
22 | Shanxi | 112  
22 | Jilin | 112  
22 | Ningxia | 112  
26 | Heilongjiang | 111  
26 | Qinghai | 111  
28 | Shanghai | 109  
29 | Inner Mongolia | 107  
30 | Xinjiang | 106  
31 | Tibet | 104

### India[edit]

Further information: Female foeticide in India

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ec/2011_Census_sex_ratio_map_for_the_states_and_Union_Territories_of_India_Boys_to_Girls_0_to_1_age_group.svg/200px-2011_Census_sex_ratio_map_for_the_states_and_Union_Territories_of_India_Boys_to_Girls_0_to_1_age_group.svg.png)

A map of India's child sex ratio, 2011.

India's 2001 census revealed a national 0–6 age child sex ratio of 108, which
increased to 109 according to 2011 census (927 girls per 1000 boys and 919
girls per 1000 boys respectively, compared to expected normal ratio of 943
girls per 1000 boys).[73][74] The national average masks the variations in
regional numbers according to 2011 census—Haryana's ratio was 120, Punjab's
ratio was 118, Jammu & Kashmir was 116, and Gujarat's ratio was 111.[75] The
2011 Census found eastern states of India had birth sex ratios between 103 and
104, lower than normal.[76] In contrast to decadal nationwide census data,
small non-random sample surveys report higher child sex ratios in India.[77]

The child sex ratio in India shows a regional pattern. India's 2011 census
found that all eastern and southern states of India had a child sex ratio
between 103 and 107,[75] typically considered as the “natural ratio.” The
highest sex ratios were observed in India's northern and northwestern states –
Haryana (120), Punjab (118) and Jammu & Kashmir (116).[78] The western states
of Maharashtra and Rajasthan 2011 census found a child sex ratio of 113,
Gujarat at 112 and Uttar Pradesh at 111.[78]

The Indian census data suggests there is a positive correlation between
abnormal sex ratio and better socio-economic status and literacy. Urban India
has higher child sex ratio than rural India according to 1991, 2001 and 2011
Census data, implying higher prevalence of sex selective abortion in urban
India. Similarly, child sex ratio greater than 115 boys per 100 girls is found
in regions where the predominant majority is Hindu, Muslim, Sikh or Christian;
furthermore "normal" child sex ratio of 104 to 106 boys per 100 girls are also
found in regions where the predominant majority is Hindu, Muslim, Sikh or
Christian. These data contradict any hypotheses that may suggest that sex
selection is an archaic practice which takes place among uneducated, poor
sections or particular religion of the Indian society.[75][79]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f8/India_Male_to_Female_Sex_Ratio_1941_1951_1961_1981_1991_2001_2011.png/250px-

India_Male_to_Female_Sex_Ratio_1941_1951_1961_1981_1991_2001_2011.png)

The male to female sex ratio for India, based on its official census data from
1941 through to 2011. The data suggests the existence of high sex ratios
before and after the arrival of ultrasound-based prenatal care and sex
screening technologies in India.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4b/6th_Earl_of_Mayo.jpg/200px-6th_Earl_of_Mayo.jpg)

Richard Bourke, 6th Earl of Mayo, who was Governor-General of India at the
time of the Female Infanticide Prevention Act, 1870.

Rutherford and Roy, in their 2003 paper, suggest that techniques for
determining sex prenatally that were pioneered in the 1970s, gained popularity
in India.[80] These techniques, claim Rutherford and Roy, became broadly
available in 17 of 29 Indian states by the early 2000s. Such prenatal sex
determination techniques, claim Sudha and Rajan in a 1999 report, where
available, favored male births.[81]

Arnold, Kishor, and Roy, in their 2002 paper, too hypothesize that modern
fetal sex screening techniques have skewed child sex ratios in India.[82]
Ganatra et al., in their 2000 paper, use a small survey sample to estimate
that ​1⁄6 of reported abortions followed a sex determination test.[83]

Mevlude Akbulut-Yuksel and Daniel Rosenblum, in their 2012 paper, find that
despite numerous publications and studies, there is limited formal evidence on
the effects of the continued spread of ultrasound technology on missing women
in India. They conclude, contrary to common belief, that the recent rapid
spread of ultrasound in India, from the 1990s through 2000s, did not cause a
concomitant rise in sex-selection and prenatal female abortion.[54]

The Indian government and various advocacy groups have continued the debate
and discussion about ways to prevent sex selection. The immorality of prenatal
sex selection has been questioned, with some arguments in favor of prenatal
discrimination as more humane than postnatal discrimination by a family that
does not want a female child. Others question whether the morality of sex
selective abortion is any different over morality of abortion when there is no
risk to the mother nor to the fetus, and abortion is used as a means to end an
unwanted pregnancy?[84][85][86]

India passed its first abortion-related law, the so-called Medical Termination
of Pregnancy Act of 1971, making abortion legal in most states, but specified
legally acceptable reasons for abortion such as medical risk to mother and
rape. The law also established physicians who can legally provide the
procedure and the facilities where abortions can be performed, but did not
anticipate sex selective abortion based on technology advances.[87]

With increasing availability of sex screening technologies in India through
the 1980s in urban India, and claims of its misuse, the Government of India
passed the Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques Act (PNDT) in 1994. This law was
further amended into the Pre-Conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques
(Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) (PCPNDT) Act in 2004 to deter and punish
prenatal sex screening and sex selective abortion. The impact of the law and
its enforcement is unclear. United Nations Population Fund and India's
National Human Rights Commission, in 2009, asked the Government of India to
assess the impact of the law. The Public Health Foundation of India, an
activist NGO in its 2010 report, claimed a lack of awareness about the Act in
parts of India, inactive role of the Appropriate Authorities, ambiguity among
some clinics that offer prenatal care services, and the role of a few medical
practitioners in disregarding the law.[79]

The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of India has targeted education and
media advertisements to reach clinics and medical professionals to increase
awareness. The Indian Medical Association has undertaken efforts to prevent
prenatal sex selection by giving its members _Beti Bachao_ (save the daughter)
badges during its meetings and conferences.[79]

In November 2007, MacPherson estimated that 100,000 abortions every year
continue to be performed in India solely because the fetus is female.[88]

### Other Asian countries[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b6/Pakistan_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg/220px-

Pakistan_%28orthographic_projection%29.svg.png)

Pakistan has a tradition of sex selection. Similarly with India, the tradition
of dowry plays role.

Other countries with large populations but high sex ratios include Pakistan
and Vietnam. United Nations Population Fund, in its 2012 report,[89] claims
the birth sex ratio of Vietnam at 111 with its densely populated Red River
Delta region at 116; for Pakistan, the UN estimates the birth sex ratio to be
110. The urban regions of Pakistan, particularly its densely populated region
of Punjab, report a sex ratio above 112 (less than 900 females per 1000
males).[90] Hudson and Den Boer estimate the resulting deficit to be about 6
million missing girls in Pakistan than what would normally be expected.[91]
Three different research studies, according to Klausen and Wink, note that
Pakistan had the world's highest percentage of missing girls, relative to its
total pre-adult female population.[92] Taiwan has reported a sex ratio at
birth between 1.07 and 1.11 every year, across 4 million births, over the
20-year period from 1991 to 2011, with the highest birth sex ratios in the
2000s.[93] Sex-selective abortion is reported to be common in South Korea too,
but its incidence has declined in recent years.[94][95][96] As of 2015, South
Korea's sex ratio at birth was 1.07 male/female.[32] In 2015, Hong Kong had a
sex ratio at birth of 1.12 male/female.[32] A 2001 study on births in the late
1990s concluded that "sex selection or sex-selective abortion might be
practiced among Hong Kong Chinese women".[97]

Recently, a rise in the sex ratio at birth has been noted in some parts of
Nepal, most notably in the Kathmandu Valley, but also in districts such as
Kaski.[98][99] High sex ratios at birth are most notable amongst richer, more
educated sections of the population in urban areas.[98]

## Europe[edit]

Abnormal sex ratios at birth, possibly explained by growing incidence of sex-
selective abortion, have also been noted in some other countries outside South
and East Asia. According to CIA, the most imbalanced birth sex ratios in
Europe (2017) are in Liechtenstein, Armenia, Albania, Azerbaijan, San Marino,
Kosovo and Macedonia; with Liechtenstein having the most imbalanced sex ratio
in the world.[32]

### Caucasus[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/17/Caucasus_topographic_map-

en.svg/250px-Caucasus_topographic_map-en.svg.png)

Topography of the Caucasus, a region at the border of Europe and Asia,
situated between the Black and the Caspian seas

The Caucasus has been named a "male-dominated region", and as families have
become smaller in recent years, the pressures to have sons has increased.[100]
Before the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s, the birth sex
ratio in Caucasus countries such as Azerbaijan, Armenia and Georgia was in the
105 to 108 range. After the collapse, the birth sex ratios sharply climbed and
have remained high for the last 20 years.[101] Christian Armenia and Georgia,
as well as Islamic Azerbaijan have seen strongly imbalanced birth sex ratios
in the first decade of the 21st century.[46] In Georgia, the birth sex ratio
for the years 2005–2009 was cited by _The Economist_ to be about 120, a trend
_The Economist_ claims suggests that the practice of sex-selective abortion in
the Caucasus has been similar to those in East Asia and South Asia in recent
decades.[46]

According to an article in _The Economist_ the sex ratio in Armenia is seen to
be a function of birth order. The article claimed that among first born
children, there are 138 boys for every 100 girls.[46] Overall, the birth sex
ratio in Armenia exceeded 115 in some years, far higher than India's which was
cited at 108.[46][102][103] While these high birth sex ratios suggest sex-
selective abortion, there is no direct evidence of observed large-scale sex-
selective abortions in Caucasus.[101]

According to latest CIA data, the 2017 sex ratio in the region is 112 for
Armenia, 109 for Azerbaijan, and 107 for Georgia.[32]

### Southeast Europe[edit]

An imbalanced birth sex ratio has been present in the 21st century in the
Western Balkans, in countries such as Albania, Macedonia, Kosovo and
Montenegro. Scholars claim this suggests that sex-selective abortions are
common in southeast Europe.[3][104][105] As of 2017, according to CIA
estimates, Albania birth sex ratio is 109.[32] According to Eurostat and birth
record data over 2008–11, the birth sex ratios of Albania and Montenegro for
that period were 112 and 110 respectively.[45] In recent years, Montenegrin
health authorities have expressed concern with regard to the significant
imbalance between the number of male and female births.[106] However the data
from CIA in 2017 cites the birth ratio for Montenegro within the normal range,
at 106.[32] In recent years, the birth registration data for Macedonia and
Kosovo indicate unbalanced birth sex ratios, including a birth rate in 2010 of
112 for Kosovo.[107] As 2017, CIA cited both Macedonia and Kosovo at 108.[32]

## United States[edit]

Like in other countries, sex-selective abortion is difficult to track in the
United States because of lack of data.

While the majority of parents in United States do not practice sex-selective
abortion, there is certainly a trend toward male preference. According to a
2011 Gallup poll, if they were only allowed to have one child, 40% of
respondents said they would prefer a boy, while only 28% preferred a
girl.[108] When told about prenatal sex selection techniques such as sperm
sorting and in vitro fertilization embryo selection, 40% of Americans surveyed
thought that picking embryos by sex was an acceptable manifestation of
reproductive rights.[109] These selecting techniques are available at about
half of American fertility clinics, as of 2006.[110]

However, it is notable that minority groups that immigrate into the United
States bring their cultural views and mindsets into the country with them. A
study carried out at a Massachusetts infertility clinic shows that the
majority of couples using these techniques, such as Preimplantation genetic
diagnosis came from a Chinese or Asian background. This is thought to branch
from the social importance of giving birth to male children in China and other
Asian countries.[111]

A study of the 2000 United States Census suggests possible male bias in
families of Chinese, Korean and Indian immigrants, which was getting
increasingly stronger in families where first one or two children were female.
In those families where the first two children were girls, the birth sex ratio
of the third child was 151.[112]

Because of this movement toward sex preference and selection, many bans on
sex-selective abortion have been proposed at the state and federal level. In
2010 and 2011, sex-selective abortions were banned in Oklahoma and Arizona,
respectively. Legislators in Georgia, West Virginia, Michigan, Minnesota, New
Jersey, and New York have also tried to pass acts banning the procedure.[109]

## Other countries[edit]

A 2013 study[103] by John Bongaarts based on surveys in 61 major countries
calculates the sex ratios that would result if parents had the number of sons
and daughters they want. In 35 countries, claims Bongaarts, the desired birth
sex ratio in respective countries would be more than 110 boys for every 100
girls if parents in these countries had a child matching their preferred
gender (higher than India's, which The Economist claims is 108).[46]

## Estimates of missing women[edit]

Estimates of implied missing girls, considering the "normal" birth sex ratio
to be the 103–107 range, vary considerably between researchers and underlying
assumptions for expected post-birth mortality rates for men and women. For
example, a 2005 study estimated that over 90 million females were "missing"
from the expected population in Afghanistan, Bangladesh, China, India,
Pakistan, South Korea and Taiwan alone, and suggested that sex-selective
abortion plays a role in this deficit.[2][91] For early 1990s, Sen estimated
107 million missing women, Coale estimated 60 million as missing, while Klasen
estimated 89 million missing women in China, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh,
Nepal, West Asia and Egypt.[13] Guilmoto,[113] in his 2010 report, uses recent
data (except for Pakistan), and estimates a much lower number of missing
girls, but notes that the higher sex ratios in numerous countries have created
a gender gap – shortage of girls – in the 0–19 age group.

**Country** | **Gender gap**  
0–19 age group (2010)[113] | % of minor  
females[113] | **Region** | **Religious situation**  
---|---|---|---|---  
Afghanistan | 265,000 | 3.0 | South Asia | Mostly Islam  
Albania | 21,000 | 4.2 | Southeast Europe | Religiously diverse  
Armenia | 35,000 | 8.4 | Caucasus | Mostly Christianity  
Azerbaijan | 111,000 | 8.3 | Caucasus | Mostly Islam  
Bangladesh | 416,000 | 1.4 | South Asia | Mostly Islam  
China | 25,112,000 | 15.0 | East Asia | Religiously diverse  
Georgia | 24,000 | 4.6 | Caucasus | Mostly Christianity  
India | 12,618,000 | 5.3 | South Asia | Mostly Hinduism  
Montenegro | 3,000 | 3.6 | Southeast Europe | Mostly Christianity  
Nepal | 125,000 | 1.8 | South Asia | Mostly Hinduism  
Pakistan | 206,000 | 0.5 | South Asia | Mostly Islam  
South Korea | 336,000 | 6.2 | East Asia | Religiously diverse  
Singapore | 21,000 | 3.5 | Southeast Asia | Religiously diverse  
Vietnam | 139,000 | 1.0 | Southeast Asia | Religiously diverse

## Disparate gendered access to resources[edit]

Although there is significant evidence of the prevalence of sex-selective
abortions in many nations (especially India and China), there is also evidence
to suggest that some of the variation in global sex ratios is due to disparate
access to resources. As MacPherson (2007) notes, there can be significant
differences in gender violence and access to food, healthcare, immunizations
between male and female children. This leads to high infant and childhood
mortality among girls, which causes changes in sex ratio.[88]

Disparate, gendered access to resources appears to be strongly linked to
socioeconomic status. Specifically, poorer families are sometimes forced to
ration food, with daughters typically receiving less priority than sons.[13]
However, Klasen's 2001 study revealed that this practice is less common in the
poorest families, but rises dramatically in the slightly less poor
families.[13] Klasen and Wink's 2003 study suggests that this is "related to
greater female economic independence and fewer cultural strictures among the
poorest sections of the population". In other words, the poorest families are
typically less bound by cultural expectations and norms, and women tend to
have more freedom to become family breadwinners out of necessity.[13]

Increased sex ratios can be caused by disparities in aspects of life other
than vital resources. According to Sen (1990), differences in wages and job
advancement also have a dramatic effect on sex ratios. This is why high sex
ratios are sometimes seen in nations with little sex-selective abortion.[14]
Additionally, high female education rates are correlated with lower sex ratios
(World Bank 2011).[114]

Lopez and Ruzikah (1983) found that, when given the same resources, women tend
to outlive men at all stages of life after infancy. However, globally,
resources are not always allocated equitably. Thus, some scholars argue that
disparities in access to resources such as healthcare, education, and
nutrition play at least a small role in the high sex ratios seen in some parts
of the world.[13] For example, Alderman and Gerter (1997) found that unequal
access to healthcare is a primary cause of female death in developing nations,
especially in Southeast Asia. Moreover, in India, lack of equal access to
healthcare has led to increased disease and higher rates of female mortality
in every age group until the late thirties (Sen 1990). This is particularly
noteworthy because, in regions of the world where women receive equal
resources, women tend to outlive men (Sen 1990). Women outlive men in all but
2 countries.[115]

Economic disadvantage alone may not always lead to increased sex ratio,
claimed Sen in 1990. For example, in sub-Saharan Africa, one of the most
economically disadvantaged regions of the world, there is an excess of women.
So, if economic disadvantage is uncorrelated with sex ratio in Africa, some
other factor(s) may be at play.[14] More detailed analysis of African
demographics, in 2002, suggests that Africa too has wide variation in birth
sex ratios (from 1.01 in Bantu populations of East Africa to 1.08 in Nigeria
and Ethiopia).[116] Thus economic disadvantage remains a possible unresolved
hypothesis for Africa as well.

## Reasons for sex-selective abortion[edit]

Various theories have been proposed as possible reasons for sex-selective
abortion. Culture rather than economic conditions is favored by some
researchers because such deviations in sex ratios do not exist in sub-Saharan
Africa, Latin America, and the Caribbean.[2] Other hypotheses include
disparate gender-biased access to resources,[88] and attempts to control
population growth such as using one child policy.[63]

Some demographers question whether sex-selective abortion or infanticide
claims are accurate, because underreporting of female births may also explain
high sex ratios.[117][118] Natural reasons may also explain some of the
abnormal sex ratios.[7][17] In contrast to these possible causes of abnormal
sex ratio, Klasen and Wink suggest India and China's high sex ratios are
primarily the result of sex-selective abortion.[13]

### Cultural preference[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/86/Burying_Babies_in_China_%28p.40%2C_March_1865%2C_XXII%29.jpg/200px-

Burying_Babies_in_China_%28p.40%2C_March_1865%2C_XXII%29.jpg)

Burying Babies in China (p.40, March 1865, XXII). There is a long tradition of
female infanticide in China.[119]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/c/cf/Infanticide-

ganges.jpg/200px-Infanticide-ganges.jpg)

Infanticide committed by throwing an infant into the Ganges river

The reason for intensifying sex-selection abortion in China and India can be
seen through history and cultural background. Generally, before the
information era, male babies were preferred because they provided manual labor
and continuation of the family lineage. Labor is still important in developing
nations as China and India, but when it comes to family lineage, it is of
great importance.

The selective abortion of female fetuses is most common in areas where
cultural norms value male children over female children for a variety of
social and economic reasons.[1] A son is often preferred as an "asset" since
he can earn and support the family; a daughter is a "liability" since she will
be married off to another family, and so will not contribute financially to
her parents. Sex selective female abortion is a continuation, in a different
form, of a practice of female infanticide or withholding of postnatal health
care for girls in certain households.[120] Furthermore, in some cultures sons
are expected to take care of their parents in their old age.[121] These
factors are complicated by the effect of diseases on child sex ratio, where
communicable and noncommunicable diseases affect males and females
differently.[120] In parts of India and Pakistan, there are social norms such
as purdah, which stipulate that female seclusion and confinement to the home
is necessary. Such practices are prevalent among some Muslim and Hindu
communities in South Asia. When females interact with men, or are believed to
do so, the "family honor" is tarnished.

Historically, in many South Asian populations, women were allocated a very low
status, evidenced through practices such as sati, an ancient funeral custom
where a widow immolated herself on her husband's pyre or committed suicide in
another fashion shortly after her husband's death.[122][123][124] Such
societies, in placing almost no value on females, encouraged parents to commit
infanticide of girls or to abandon them. The modern practice of sex-selective
abortion is therefore a continuation of other historical practices. During the
19th century, in the Northwest British India, one-fourth of the population
preserved only half the daughters, while other 3/4th of the population had
balanced sex ratio. There were 118 males per 100 females. This is comparable
to the contemporary sex ratio in the area, now divided between India and
Pakistan.[125]

Chinese culture is deeply patriarchal. Pre-modern Chinese society was
predominantly patriarchal and patrilineal from at least the 11th century BCE
onwards.[126] There has long been a son preference in China, leading to high
rates of female infanticide, as well as a strong tradition of restricting the
freedom of movement of women, particularly upper class women, manifested
through the practice of foot binding. Although the legal and social standing
of women have greatly improved in the 20th century, son preference remains
still strong, and the situation was aggravated by the one child policy.

Interpretations of Confucianism have been argued to contribute to the low
status of women. The gender roles prescribed in the Three Obediences and Four
Virtues became a cornerstone of the family, and thus, societal stability.
Starting from the Han period, Confucians began to teach that a virtuous woman
was supposed to follow the males in her family: the father before her
marriage, the husband after she marries, and her sons in widowhood. In the
later dynasties, more emphasis was placed on the virtue of chastity. The Song
dynasty Confucian Cheng Yi stated that: "To starve to death is a small matter,
but to lose one's chastity is a great matter."[127] The "cult of chastity"
accordingly, condemned many widows to poverty and loneliness by placing a
social stigma on remarriage.[128]

In modern East Asia, a large part of the pattern of preferences leading to
this practice can be condensed simply as a desire to have a male heir. Monica
Das Gupta (2005) observes, from 1989 birth data for China, there was no
evidence of selective abortion of female fetuses among firstborn children.
However, there was a strong preference for a boy if the first born was a
girl.[120]

### Dowry[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7b/Say_no_to_dowry.jpg/220px-

Say_no_to_dowry.jpg)

A social awareness campaign in India against dowries

Further information: Dowry system in India

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/58/India_-

_Delhi_wedding_-_5438.jpg/200px-India_-_Delhi_wedding_-_5438.jpg)

Wedding gifts for the son of the Imam of Delhi, India, with soldiers and 2000
guests. Large dowries are expected among several populations in South Asia,
especially in India and Pakistan.

Dowry is the property that parents of a female transfer at her marriage. Dowry
is an ancient practice, that has been common in many cultures around the
world, and which is today prevalent especially in South Asia. The custom of
dowry is most common in cultures that are strongly patrilineal and that expect
women to reside with or near their husband's family (patrilocality).[129]

Kirti Singh states that dowry is widely considered to be both a cause and a
consequence of son preference, and this may lead to girls being unwanted, sex
selective abortion, female infanticide or abuse of female children.[130]

The dowry system in India is a major part of Indian culture and refers to the
durable goods, cash, and real or movable property that the bride's family
gives to the bridegroom, his parents, or his relatives as a condition of the
marriage.[131] Dowry consists of a payment in cash or some kind of gifts given
to the bridegroom's family along with the bride and includes cash, jewelry,
electrical appliances, furniture, bedding, crockery, utensils and other
household items that help the newlyweds set up their home.[132] Disputes
regarding dowry sometimes lead to dowry deaths.

### One-child policy[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/db/Danshan_Nongguang_Village_Bulletin_board.jpg/200px-

Danshan_Nongguang_Village_Bulletin_board.jpg)

The one child policy in China has contributed to the imbalanced sex ratios.
Image shows a community bulletin board in Nonguang Village, Sichuan province,
China, keeping track of the town's female population, listing recent births by
name and noting that several thousand yuan of fines for unauthorized births
remain unpaid from the previous year.

Following the 1949 creation of the People's Republic of China, the issue of
population control came into the national spotlight. In the early years of the
Republic, leaders believed that telling citizens to reduce their fertility was
enough, repealing laws banning contraception and instead promoting its use.
However, the contraceptives were not widely available, both because of lack of
supply and because of cultural taboo against discussing sex. Efforts were
slowed following the famine of 1959–61 but were resumed shortly thereafter
with virtually the same results. Then, in 1964, the Family Planning Office was
established to enforce stricter guidelines regarding fertility and it was
moderately successful.[133]

In 1979, the government adopted the One-Child Policy, which limited many
families to one child, unless specified by provincial regulations. It was
instituted as an attempt to boost the Chinese economy. Under it, families who
break rules regarding the number of children they are allowed are given
various punishments (primarily monetary), dependent upon the province in which
they live.[134]

As stated above, the sex ratios of a province are largely determined by the
type of restriction placed upon the family, pointing to the conclusion that
much of the imbalance in sex ratio in China can be attributed to the policy.
Research by Junhong (2001) found that many parents are willing to pay to
ensure that their child is male (especially if their first child is female),
but will not do the same to ensure their child is female.[10] Likely, fear of
the harsh monetary punishments of the One-Child Policy make ensuring a son's
birth a smart investment. Therefore, son's cultural and economic importance to
families and the large expenses associated with multiple children are primary
factors leading to China's disparate sex ratio.

In 2013, China announced plans to formally change the One-Child policy, making
it less stringent. The National People's Congress has changed the policy to
allow couples to have two children, so long as one of the partners is an only
child. This change was not sparked by sex ratios, but rather by an aging
population that is causing the workforce to become increasingly smaller. It is
estimated that this new law will lead to two million more births per year and
could cause a baby boom in China. In 2015, China officially relaxed its one
child law.[135] Unfortunately, many of China's social problems are based on
overpopulation. So, it is unclear if this new law will actually lead to women
being more valued in Chinese society as the number of citizens increases.[136]

### Trivers–Willard hypothesis[edit]

The Trivers–Willard hypothesis argues that available resources affect male
reproductive success more than female and that consequently parents should
prefer males when resources are plentiful and females when resources are
scarce. This has been applied to resource differences between individuals in a
society and also to resource differences between societies. Empirical evidence
is mixed with higher support in better studies according to Cronk in a 2007
review. One example, in a 1997 study, of a group with a preference for females
was Romani in Hungary, a low status group. They "had a female-biased sex ratio
at birth, were more likely to abort a fetus after having had one or more
daughters, nursed their daughters longer, and sent their daughters to school
for longer."[137]

## Societal effects[edit]

### Missing women[edit]

Main article: Missing women

The idea of “missing women” was first suggested by Amartya Sen, one of the
first scholars to study high sex ratios and their causes globally, in 1990. In
order to illustrate the gravity of the situation, he calculated the number of
women that were not alive because of sex-selective abortion or discriminatory
practices. He found that there were 11 percent fewer women than there “should”
have been, if China had the natural sex ratio. This figure, when combined with
statistics from around the world, led to a finding of over 100 million missing
women. In other words, by the early 1990s, the number of missing women was
“larger than the combined casualties of all famines in the twentieth century”
(Sen 1990).[14]

This has led to particular concern due to a critical shortage of wives. In
some rural areas, there is already a shortage of women, which is tied to
migration into urban areas (Park and Cho 1995).[138] In South Korea and
Taiwan, high male sex ratios and declining birth rates over several decades
have led to cross-cultural marriage between local men and foreign women from
countries such as mainland China, Vietnam and the Philippines.[139] However,
sex-selective abortion is not the only cause of this phenomenon; it is also
related to migration and declining fertility.[138]

### Trafficking, forced marriage and sex work[edit]

Some scholars argue that as the proportion of women to men decreases globally,
there will be an increase in trafficking and sex work (both forced and self-
elected), as many men will be willing to do more to obtain a sexual partner
(Junhong 2001).[10] Already, there are reports of women from Vietnam, Myanmar,
and North Korea systematically trafficked to mainland China and Taiwan and
sold into forced marriages.[140] Moreover, Ullman and Fidell (1989) suggested
that pornography and sex-related crimes of violence (i.e., rape and
molestation) would also increase with an increasing sex ratio.[141]

### Widening of the gender social gap[edit]

As Park and Cho (1995) note, families in areas with high sex ratios that have
mostly sons tend to be smaller than those with mostly daughters (because the
families with mostly sons appear to have used sex-selective techniques to
achieve their “ideal” composition).[138] Particularly in poor areas, large
families tend to have more problems with resource allocation, with daughters
often receiving fewer resources than sons.[138] Blake (1989) is credited for
noting the relationship between family size and childhood “quality.”
Therefore, if families with daughters continue to be predominantly large, it
is likely that the social gap between genders will widen due to traditional
cultural discrimination and lack of resource availability.[142]

Guttentag and Secord (1983) hypothesized that when the proportion of males
throughout the world is greater, there is likely to be more violence and
war.[143]

### Potential positive effects[edit]

Some scholars believe that when sex ratios are high, women actually become
valued more because of their relative shortage.[138] Park and Cho (1995)
suggest that as women become more scarce, they may have “increased value for
conjugal and reproductive functions” (75). Eventually, this could lead to
better social conditions, followed by the birth of more women and sex ratios
moving back to natural levels.[138] This claim is supported by the work of
demographer Nathan Keifitz. Keifitz (1983) wrote that as women become fewer,
their relative position in society will increase. However, to date, no data
has supported this claim.[144]

It has been suggested by Belanger (2002) that sex-selective abortion may have
positive effects on the mother choosing to abort the female fetus. This is
related to the historical duty of mothers to produce a son in order to carry
on the family name. As previously mentioned, women gain status in society when
they have a male child, but not when they have a female child. Oftentimes,
bearing of a son leads to greater legitimacy and agency for the mother. In
some regions of the world where son preference is especially strong, sonless
women are treated as outcasts. In this way, sex-selective abortion is a way
for women to select for male fetuses, helping secure greater family
status.[145]

Goodkind (1999)[146] argues that sex-selective abortion should not be banned
purely because of its discriminatory nature. Instead, he argues, we must
consider the overall lifetime possibilities of discrimination. In fact, it is
possible that sex-selective abortion takes away much of the discrimination
women would face later in life. Since families have the option of selecting
for the fetal sex they desire, if they choose not to abort a female fetus, she
is more likely to be valued later in life. In this way, sex-selective abortion
may be a more humane alternative to infanticide, abandonment, or neglect.
Goodkind (1999) poses an essential philosophical question, “if a ban were
enacted against prenatal sex testing (or the use of abortion for sex-selective
purposes), how many excess postnatal deaths would a society be willing to
tolerate in lieu of whatever sex-selective abortions were avoided?”

### Controversies[edit]

There are many controversies surrounding sex-selective abortion. Just like the
practice of sex-selective abortion has been criticized, the solutions proposed
or enacted by governments have also been criticized.[147][148] It is argued
that the response to a patriarchal practice (sex selection) should not be
another patriarchal practice (restricting women's reproductive rights), as
such a situation creates a cycle: women's social status is lowered, which in
turn leads to more sex-selective abortions.[149] The association of public
discourse on sex-selective abortion with the anti-abortion movement also
complicates the situation.[150] Furthermore, access to safe abortion is seen
as important from a public health perspective; in India although the abortion
law is relatively liberal, most efforts are put into preventing sex-selective
abortion, rather than adequate access to safe abortion,[151] as a result
nearly 78% of all abortions in India take place outside of health facilities,
with such unsafe abortions representing the third largest cause of maternal
death in India.[152] Another controversy in that of population planning
campaigns such as the one child policy in China, and efforts from the
governments of several Asian countries, including India and South Korea, from
the 1970s onward to limit the number of children a family could have, which
have intensified the desire to quickly have a son. An article by Al Jazeera
titled " _How Western family planners helped curb the birth of girls in
developing countries, the effects of which are felt today_ " claimed that it
was such population policies (which included forced sterilization), which were
fully supported, even pushed by the West, that contributed to unbalanced sex
ratios.[153]

## Sex-selective abortion in the context of abortion[edit]

MacPherson estimates that 100,000 sex-selective abortions every year continue
to be performed in India.[88] For a contrasting perspective, in the United
States with a population ​1⁄4th of India, over 1.2 million abortions every
year were performed between 1990 and 2007.[154] In England and Wales with a
population ​1⁄20th of India, over 189,000 abortions were performed in 2011, or
a yearly rate of 17.5 abortions per 1,000 women aged 15–44.[155] The average
for the European Union was 30 abortions per year per 1,000 women.[156]

Many scholars have noted the difficulty in reconciling the discriminatory
nature of sex-selective abortion with the right of women to have control over
their own bodies. This conflict manifests itself primarily when discussing
laws about sex-selective abortion. Weiss (1995:205) writes: "The most obvious
challenge sex-selective abortion represents for pro-choice feminists is the
difficulty of reconciling a pro-choice position with moral objections one
might have to sex selective abortion (especially since it has been used
primarily on female fetuses), much less the advocacy of a law banning sex-
selective abortion."[157] As a result, arguments both for and against sex-
selective abortion are typically highly reflective of one's own personal
beliefs about abortion in general. Warren (1985:104) argues that there is a
difference between acting within one's rights and acting upon the most morally
sound choice, implying that sex-selective abortion might be within rights but
not morally sound. Warren also notes that, if we are to ever reverse the trend
of sex-selective abortion and high sex ratios, we must work to change the
patriarchy-based society which breeds the strong son preference.[158]

Laws against sex-selective abortion, especially those that exist in some U.S.
states, are controversial, because it is not clear how they can be enforced,
and pro-choice activists argue that such laws are brought by anti-abortion
movement forces who are using this as a pretext to restrict women's access to
safe and legal abortion and to harass doctors who perform abortions: NARAL
states that "For many years, anti-choice lawmakers have tried to ban abortion
using every possible reason and excuse –including, now, on the grounds of
purported concern about race or sex selection."[159] There is concern that
such bans may put women who seek sex-selective abortions in danger because
they may seek unsafe abortions, and that these bans do not address the root
cause of sex-selective abortion, including the pregnant women's fear that they
or their future daughters will suffer abuse, violence and stigmatization.[147]

## Laws, campaigns and policies against sex-selective abortion[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/91/Something_you_wouldn%27t_see_in_America_%28cropped%29.jpg/220px-

Something_you_wouldn%27t_see_in_America_%28cropped%29.jpg)

Sign in an Indian clinic reading "Prenatal disclosure of sex of foetus is
prohibited under law" in English and Hindi

### International[edit]

The practice of prenatal sex selection has been condemned internationally. It
is often seen as a result of discriminatory social views which consider
females inferior to males. In 1994 over 180 states signed the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and Development, agreeing
to "eliminate all forms of discrimination against the girl child".[160] In
2011 the resolution of PACE's Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and
Men condemned the practice of prenatal sex selection.[161]

### By country[edit]

Many nations have attempted to address sex-selective abortion rates through a
combination of media campaigns and policy initiatives.

Canada

In Canada, a group of MPs led by Mark Warawa are working on having the
Parliament pass a resolution condemning sex-selective pregnancy
termination.[162][163]

USA

The United States Congress has debated legislation that would outlaw the
practice.[164] The legislation ultimately failed to pass in the House of
Representatives.[165]

On the state level, laws against sex-selective abortions have been passed in a
number of U.S. states;[166] the law passed in Arizona in 2011 prohibits both
sex-selective and race-selective abortion.[166][167][168]

United Kingdom

The law on sex-selective abortion is unresolved in the United Kingdom. In
order for an abortion to be legal, doctors need to show that continuing the
pregnancy could threaten the physical or mental health of the mother. In a
recent case, two doctors were caught on camera offering a sex-selective
abortion but the Director of Public Prosecution deemed it not in the public
interest to proceed with the prosecution.[169] Following this incidence, MPs
voted 181 to 1 for a Bill put forward by Tessa Munt and 11 other MPs aiming to
end confusion about the legality of this practice.[170][171] Organisations
such as BPAS and Abortion Rights have been lobbying for the decriminalisation
of sex-selective abortions.[172][173]

China

China's government has increasingly recognized its role in a reduction of the
national sex ratio. As a result, since 2005, it has sponsored a “boys and
girls are equal campaign.”[174] For example, in 2000, the Chinese government
began the “Care for Girls” Initiative.[175] Furthermore, several levels of
government have been modified to protect the “political, economic, cultural,
and social” rights of women.[174] Finally, the Chinese government has enacted
policies and interventions to help reduce the sex ratio at birth. In 2005,
sex-selective abortion was made illegal in China. This came in response to the
ever-increasing sex ratio and a desire to try to detract from it and reach a
more normal ratio.[176] The sex ratio among firstborn children in urban areas
from 2000 to 2005 didn't rise at all, so there is hope that this movement is
taking hold across the nation.[10]

UNICEF and UNFPA have partnered with the Chinese government and grassroots-
level women's groups such as All China Women's Federation to promote gender
equality in policy and practice, as well engage various social campaigns to
help lower birth sex ratio and to reduce excess female child mortality
rates.[177][178]

India

In India, according to a 2007 study by MacPherson, Prenatal Diagnostic
Techniques Act (PCPNDT Act) was highly publicized by NGOs and the government.
Many of the ads used depicted abortion as violent, creating fear of abortion
itself within the population. The ads focused on the religious and moral shame
associated with abortion. MacPherson claims this media campaign was not
effective because some perceived this as an attack on their character, leading
to many becoming closed off, rather than opening a dialogue about the
issue.[88] This emphasis on morality, claims MacPherson, increased fear and
shame associated with all abortions, leading to an increase in unsafe
abortions in India.[88]

The government of India, in a 2011 report, has begun better educating all
stakeholders about its MTP and PCPNDT laws. In its communication campaigns, it
is clearing up public misconceptions by emphasizing that sex determination is
illegal, but abortion is legal for certain medical conditions in India. The
government is also supporting implementation of programs and initiatives that
seek to reduce gender discrimination, including media campaign to address the
underlying social causes of sex selection.[79][179]

Other recent policy initiatives adopted by numerous states of India, claims
Guilmoto,[113] attempt to address the assumed economic disadvantage of girls
by offering support to girls and their parents. These policies provide
conditional cash transfer and scholarships only available to girls, where
payments to a girl and her parents are linked to each stage of her life, such
as when she is born, completion of her childhood immunization, her joining
school at grade 1, her completing school grades 6, 9 and 12, her marriage past
age 21. Some states are offering higher pension benefits to parents who raise
one or two girls. Different states of India have been experimenting with
various innovations in their girl-driven welfare policies. For example, the
state of Delhi adopted a pro-girl policy initiative (locally called _Laadli
scheme_ ), which initial data suggests may be lowering the birth sex ratio in
the state.[113][180]

## See also[edit]

  * Abortion debate
  * Child abandonment
  * Fetal rights
  * Feticide
  * Gendercide
  * Gender role
  * Female foeticide in India

|

  * Genetics and abortion
  * Infanticide
  * Missing women of Asia
  * Missing women of China
  * Psychohistorical views on infanticide
  * Selective reduction
  * Sex selection

---|--- 

## References[edit]

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Goodkind, Daniel (1999). "Should Prenatal Sex Selection be Restricted?: Ethical Questions and Their Implications for Research and Policy". _Population Studies_. **53** (1): 49–61. doi:10.1080/00324720308069. JSTOR 2584811.
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ A. Gettis, J. Getis, and J. D. Fellmann (2004). Introduction to Geography, Ninth Edition. New York: McGraw-Hill. pp. 200. ISBN 0-07-252183-X
  3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ HIGH SEX RATIO AT BIRTH IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE Christophe Z Guilmoto, CEPED, Université Paris-Descartes, France (2012)
  4. **^** "China's New Birth Rule Can't Restore Missing Women and Fix a Population".
  5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kumm, J.; Laland, K. N.; Feldman, M. W. (December 1994). "Gene-culture coevolution and sex ratios: the effects of infanticide, sex-selective abortion, sex selection, and sex-biased parental investment on the evolution of sex ratios". _Theoretical Population Biology_. **46** (3, number 3): 249–278. doi:10.1006/tpbi.1994.1027. PMID 7846643.
  6. **^** Gammage, Jeff (June 21, 2011). "Gender imbalance tilting the world toward men". _The Philadelphia Inquirer_. Retrieved June 27, 2013.
  7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ James, William H. (2008). "Evidence that mammalian sex ratios at birth are partially controlled by parental hormone levels around the time of conception". _Journal of Endocrinology_. **198** (1): 3–15. doi:10.1677/JOE-07-0446. PMID 18577567.
  8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Report of the International Workshop on Skewed Sex Ratios at Birth United Nations FPA (2012)
  9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kraemer, Sebastian. "The Fragile Male." British Medical Journal (2000): n. pag. British Medical Journal. Web. 20 Oct. 2013.
  10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ _**l**_ Junhong, Chu (2001). "Prenatal Sex Determination and Sex-Selective Abortion in Rural Central China". _Population and Development Review_. **27** (2): 259–81. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2001.00259.x. JSTOR 2695209.
  11. **^** Grech, Victor; Savona-Ventura, Charles; Vassallo-Agius, P (2002). "Research pointers: Unexplained differences in sex ratios at birth in Europe and North America". _BMJ_. **324** (7344): 1010–1. doi:10.1136/bmj.324.7344.1010. PMC 102777. PMID 11976243.
  12. **^** Hesketh, T.; Xing, Z. W. (2006). "Abnormal sex ratios in human populations: Causes and consequences". _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_. **103** (36): 13271–13275. Bibcode:2006PNAS..10313271H. doi:10.1073/pnas.0602203103. PMC 1569153. PMID 16938885.
  13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ Klausen, Stephan; Wink, Claudia (2003). "Missing Women: Revisiting the Debate". _Feminist Economics_. **9** (2–3): 263–299. doi:10.1080/1354570022000077999.
  14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Sen, Amartya (1990), More than 100 million women are missing, New York Review of Books, 20 December, pp. 61–66
  15. **^** see: 
    * James WH (1987). "The human sex ratio. Part 1: A review of the literature". _Human Biology_. **59** (5): 721–752. PMID 3319883.
    * James WH (1987). "The human sex ratio. Part 2: A hypothesis and a program of research". _Human Biology_. **59** (6): 873–900. PMID 3327803.
    * Bernstein, Marianne E. (1958). "Studies in the human sex ratio. 5. A genetic explanation of the wartime increase in the secondary sex ratio". _American Journal of Human Genetics_. **10** (1): 68–70. PMC 1931860. PMID 13520702.
    * France MESLÉ; Jacques VALLIN; Irina BADURASHVILI (2007). _A Sharp Increase in Sex Ratio at Birth in the Caucasus. Why? How?_ (PDF). Committee for International Cooperation in National Research in Demography. pp. 73–89. ISBN 978-2-910053-29-1.
  16. **^** Graffelman, Jan; Hoekstra, Rolf F. (2000). "A Statistical Analysis of the Effect of Warfare on the Human Secondary Sex Ratio". _Human Biology_. **72** (3): 433–445.
  17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jacobsen, R.; Møller, H.; Mouritsen, A. (1999). "Natural variation in the human sex ratio". _Hum. Reprod_. **14** (12): 3120–3125. doi:10.1093/humrep/14.12.3120.
  18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ T Vartiainen; L Kartovaara  & J Tuomisto (1999). "Environmental chemicals and changes in sex ratio: analysis over 250 years in finland". _Environmental Health Perspectives_. **107** (10): 813–815. doi:10.1289/ehp.99107813. PMC 1566625. PMID 10504147.
  19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Michel Garenne, Southern African Journal of Demography, Vol. 9, No. 1 (June 2004), pp. 91–96
  20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Michel Garenne, Southern African Journal of Demography, Vol. 9, No. 1 (June 2004), page 95
  21. **^** Campbell, RB (August 2001). "John Graunt, John Arbuthnott, and the human sex ratio". _Hum. Biol_. **73** (4): 605–610. doi:10.1353/hub.2001.0048. PMID 11512687.
  22. **^** Ciocco, Antonio (1938). "Variation in the Sex Ratio at Birth in the United States". _Human Biology_. **10** (1): 36–64.
  23. **^** Nie, Jing-Bao (2011). "Non-medical sex-selective abortion in China: Ethical and public policy issues in the context of 40 million missing females". _British Medical Bulletin_. **98** : 7–20. doi:10.1093/bmb/ldr015. PMID 21596712.
  24. **^** Jiang B, Li S. Nüxing Queshi yu Shehui Anquan (2009), The Female Deficit and the Security of Society, Beijing: Social Sciences Academic, pp 22–26
  25. **^** Matthews TJ, et al. (June 2005). "Trend Analysis of the Sex Ratio at Birth in the United States". _National Vital Statistics Reports_. **53** (20).
  26. **^** "Sex ratio in Switzerland". Switzerland Federal Statistics Office.
  27. **^** "UN Sex Ratio Statistics". United Nations Population Division.
  28. **^** "Sex ratio at birth (per 100 female newborn)". United Nations Data Division.
  29. **^** Demographic and Health Survey
  30. **^** Garenne M (December 2002). "Sex ratios at birth in African populations: a review of survey data". _Hum. Biol_. **74** (6): 889–900. doi:10.1353/hub.2003.0003. PMID 12617497.
  31. **^** "Trend Analysis of the Sex Ratio at Birth in the United States" (PDF). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics.
  32. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency".
  33. **^** Grech, V; Savona-Ventura, C; Vassallo-Agius, P (2002). "Unexplained differences in sex ratios at birth in Europe and North America". _BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.)_. **324** (7344): 1010–1. doi:10.1136/bmj.324.7344.1010. PMC 102777. PMID 11976243.
  34. **^** Hesketh, T.; Lu, L.; Xing, Z. W. (2011). "The consequences of son preference and sex-selective abortion in China and other Asian countries". _CMAJ : Canadian Medical Association Journal = Journal de l'Association Medicale Canadienne_. **183** (12): 1374–1377. doi:10.1503/cmaj.101368. PMC 3168620. PMID 21402684.
  35. **^** "Liechtenstein Has the Most Skewed Ratio of Baby Boys and Girls in the World Right Now".
  36. **^** "The country with the highest gender disparity at birth isn't China". October 30, 2015.
  37. **^** "Georgia: Data Glitch Distorts Abortion Picture | Eurasianet".
  38. **^** "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency".
  39. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Sex Ratio, The World Factbook, CIA, US Government (2013); Note: Sex ratio of 1.26 is same as 126 boys per 100 girls".
  40. **^** Births and deliveries Switzerland (2013)
  41. **^** Sex Ratios Archived June 4, 2012, at Archive-It, Christophe Z Guilmoto, UNFPA (2011), Page 13
  42. **^** Sex ratio at birth – National and Regional Census Data Archived May 13, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Pakistan Census (2013)
  43. **^** see: 
    * Gender Imbalance: Pakistan's Missing Women Dawn, Pakistan (2013);
    * Abandoned, Aborted, or Left for Dead: These Are the Vanishing Girls of Pakistan, HABIBA NOSHEEN & HILKE SCHELLMANN, June 19, 2012, The Atlantic
  44. **^** The Consequences of the "Missing Girls" of China, Avraham Y. Ebenstein and Ethan Jennings Sharygin (2009), THE WORLD BANK ECONOMIC REVIEW, VOL. 23, NO. 3, page 401, Oxford University Press
  45. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Sex Imbalances at Birth: Current trends, consequences and policy implications Archived December 30, 2013, at the Wayback Machine United Nations FPA (August 2012)
  46. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ Gendercide in the Caucasus The Economist (September 13, 2013)
  47. **^** India Census 2011 Provisional Report Government of India (2013)
  48. **^** Devaney SA; Palomaki GE; Scott JA; Bianchi DW (2011). "Noninvasive Fetal Sex Determination Using Cell-Free Fetal DNA". _JAMA_. **306** (6): 627–636. doi:10.1001/jama.2011.1114. PMC 4526182. PMID 21828326.
  49. **^** Roberts, Michelle (August 10, 2011). "Baby gender blood tests 'accurate'". _BBC News Online_.
  50. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mazza V, Falcinelli C, Paganelli S, et al. (June 2001). "Sonographic early fetal gender assignment: a longitudinal study in pregnancies after in vitro fertilization". _Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol_. **17** (6): 513–6. doi:10.1046/j.1469-0705.2001.00421.x. PMID 11422974.
  51. **^** Alfirevic, Z; von Dadelszen, P (2003). "Instruments for chorionic villus sampling for prenatal diagnosis". _Cochrane Database Syst Rev_ : CD000114. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000114.
  52. **^** http://pndt.gov.in/writereaddata/mainlinkfile/File53.pdf
  53. **^** Junhong, Chu (2001). "Prenatal Sex Determination and Sex-Selective Abortion in Rural Central China". _Population and Development Review_. **27** (2): 260. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2001.00259.x.
  54. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Akbulut-Yuksel, Mevlude; Rosenblum, Daniel (January 2012). "The Indian Ultrasound Paradox". _IZA Discussion Paper_ (6273). SSRN 1989245.
  55. **^** Hohmann, S. A.; Lefèvre, C. A.; Garenne, M. L. (2014). "A framework for analyzing sex-selective abortion: The example of changing sex ratios in Southern Caucasus". _International Journal of Women's Health_. **6** : 889–897. doi:10.2147/IJWH.S66333. PMC 4208631. PMID 25349481.
  56. **^** Chao, Fengqing; Gerland, Patrick; Cook, Alex R.; Alkema, Leontine (April 15, 2019). "Systematic assessment of the sex ratio at birth for all countries and estimation of national imbalances and regional reference levels". _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_ : 201812593. doi:10.1073/pnas.1812593116. ISSN 0027-8424.
  57. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "China faces growing sex imbalance". January 11, 2010.
  58. **^** "China to end one-child policy". _BBC News_. October 29, 2015.
  59. **^** China's sex ratio declines for two straight years Archived February 22, 2015, at the Wayback Machine Xinhua, China
  60. **^** Kang C, Wang Y. Sex ratio at birth. In: Theses Collection of 2001 National Family Planning and Reproductive Health Survey. Beijing: China Population Publishing House, 2003:88–98.
  61. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Yi, Zeng; et al. (1993). "Causes and implications of the recent increase in the reported sex ratio at birthin China". _Population and Development Review_. **19** (2): 283–302. doi:10.2307/2938438. JSTOR 2938438.
  62. **^** Tania Branigan, China's Great Gender Crisis The Guardian, UK, 2 November 2011
  63. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Zhu, W., L. Lu, and T Hesketh. "China’s Excess Males, Sex Selective Abortion, and One Child Policy: Analysis of Data from 2005 National Intercensus Survey."] British Medical Journal (2009): n. pag.JSTOR 20512658
  64. **^** Ministry of Health and State Family Planning Commission.1986. "Notice on strictly forbidding prenatal sex determination," reprinted in Peng Peiyun(ed.), 1997, Family Planning Encyclopedia of China. Beijing: China Population Press, p. 939.
  65. **^** Ministry of Health. 1989. "Urgent notice on strictly forbidding the use of medical technology to perform prenatal sex determination," reprinted in Peng Peiyun (ed.), 1997, Family Planning Encyclopedia of China. Beijing: China Population Press, pp. 959–960.
  66. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hardee, Karen, Gu Baochang, and Xie Zhenming. 2000. "Holding up more than half the sky:Fertility control and women's empowerment in China,"paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America, 23–25 March, Los Angeles.
  67. **^** Qiu Renzong. 1987. Life Ethics Shanghai:ShanghaiPeople'sPress
  68. **^** Junhong, Chu. 2000. "Study on the quality of the family planning program in China,"paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America, 23–25 March, Los Angeles.
  69. **^** Winckler, Edwin A (2002). "Chinese Reproductive Policy at the Turn of the Millennium: Dynamic Stability". _Population and Development Review_. **28** (3): 379–418. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2002.00379.x.
  70. **^** Dudley, L. Poston Jr.; Conde, Eugenia; DeSalvo, Bethany (2011). "China's Unbalanced Sex Ratio at Birth, Millions of Excess Bachelors and Societal Implications". _Vulnerable Children and Youth Studies_. **6** (4): 314–320.
  71. **^** "China sees decrease in male to female birth ratio gap." China.org.cn, March 21, 2012. Retrieved on Nov.19 2013 from http://www.china.org.cn/video/2012-03/31/content_25036729.htm
  72. **^** Wei Xing Zhu, Li Lu, Therese Hesketh (April 9, 2009). "China's excess males, sex selective abortion, and one child policy: analysis of data from 2005 national intercensus survey". _British Medical Journal_. **338** : b1211. doi:10.1136/bmj.b1211. PMC 2667570. PMID 19359290.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
  73. **^** "Sex ratio worsens in small families, improves with 3 or more children".
  74. **^** India at Glance – Population Census 2011 – Final Archived January 8, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Census of India, Government of India (2013)
  75. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Child Sex Ratio in India Archived December 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine C Chandramouli, Registrar General  & Census Commissioner, India (2011)
  76. **^** Census of India 2011: Child sex ratio drops to lowest since Independence The Economic Times, India
  77. **^** Trends in Sex Ratio at Birth and Estimates of Girls Missing at Birth in India Archived October 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine UNFPA (July 2010)
  78. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Child Sex Ratio 2001 versus 2011 Census of India, Government of India (2013)
  79. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PCPNDT ACT IN INDIA – Perspectives and Challenges Public Health Foundation of India, Supported by United Nations FPA (2010)
  80. **^** Rutherford, R., and T. K. Roy. "Factors Affecting Sex-selective Abortion in Indian and 17 Major States." International Institute for Population Sciences and Honolulu: East-West Center (2003)
  81. **^** Sudha, S.; Rajan, S. Irudaya (1999). "Female demographic disadvantage in India 1981–1991: Sex selective abortions and female infanticide". _Development and Change_. **30** (3): 585–618. doi:10.1111/1467-7660.00130. PMID 20162850.
  82. **^** Arnold, Fred; Kishor, Sunita; Roy, T. K. (2002). "Sex-Selective Abortions in India". _Population and Development Review_. **28** (4): 759–785. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2002.00759.x.
  83. **^** Ganatra, Bela, R. 2000. "Abortion research in India: What we know, and what we need to know," in Radhika Ramasubban and Shireen J. Jejeebhoy (eds.), Women's Reproductive Health in India. New Delhi: Rawat Publications.
  84. **^** Kumar, Dharma (1983). "Male utopias or nightmares?". _Economic and Political Weekly_. **13** (3): 61–64. JSTOR 4371751.
  85. **^** Gangoli, Geetanjali (1998). "Reproduction, abortion and women's health". _Social Scientist_. **26** (11–12): 83–105. doi:10.2307/3517661. JSTOR 3517661.
  86. **^** Goodkind, Daniel (1996). "On substituting sex preference strategies in East Asia: Does pre-natal sex selection reduce post natal discrimination?". _Population and Development Review_. **22** (1): 111–125. doi:10.2307/2137689. JSTOR 2137689.
  87. **^** "Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971 – Introduction". _Med India_. October 20, 2013.
  88. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ MacPherson, Yvonne (November 2007). "Images and Icons: Harnessing the Power of Media to Reduce Sex-Selective Abortion in India". _Gender and Development_. **15** (2): 413–23. doi:10.1080/13552070701630574.
  89. **^** Sex Imbalances at Birth: Current trends, consequences and policy implications Archived December 30, 2013, at the Wayback Machine UNFPA, ISBN 978-974680-3380, page 20
  90. **^** N Purewal (2010), "Son Preference, Sex Selection, Gender and Culture in South Asia", Oxford International Publishers / Berg, ISBN 978-1-84520-468-6, page 38
  91. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ VALERIE M. HUDSON and ANDREA M. DEN BOER Missing Women and Bare Branches: Gender Balance and Conflict ECSP Report, Issue 11
  92. **^** Klausen, Stephan; Wink, Claudia (2003). "Missing Women: Revisiting the Debate". _Feminist Economics_. **9** (2–3): 270. doi:10.1080/1354570022000077999.
  93. **^** IW; et al. (2012). "Human sex ratio at amniocentesis and at birth in Taiwan". _Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol_. **51** (4): 572–575. doi:10.1016/j.tjog.2012.09.012. PMID 23276560.
  94. **^** https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/resource-pdf/regional_analysis.pdf
  95. **^** Hesketh, T; Lu, L; Xing, ZW (2011). "The consequences of son preference and sex-selective abortion in China and other Asian countries". _CMAJ_. **183** (12): 1374–7. doi:10.1503/cmaj.101368. PMC 3168620. PMID 21402684.
  96. **^** Vogel, L (2012). "Sex-selective abortions: no simple solution". _CMAJ_. **184** (3): 286–8. doi:10.1503/cmaj.109-4097. PMC 3281151. PMID 22271910.
  97. **^** Wong, SF; Ho, LC (2001). "Sex selection in practice among Hong Kong Chinese". _Soc Sci Med_. **53** (3): 393–7. doi:10.1016/s0277-9536(00)00306-3. PMID 11439822.
  98. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Frost, Melanie Dawn; Puri, Mahesh; Hinde, Peter Richard Andrew (January 1, 2013). "Falling sex ratios and emerging evidence of sex-selective abortion in Nepal: evidence from nationally representative survey data". _BMJ Open_. **3** (5): e002612. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013-002612. ISSN 2044-6055. PMC 3657664. PMID 23674444.
  99. **^** "Gender inequality in Nepal: How can we tackle sex-selective abortion?". _Oxford Institute of Population Ageing_. Retrieved November 2, 2016.
  100. **^** "Azerbaijan pressured over sex-selective abortions | News | al Jazeera".
  101. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ France MESLÉ; Jacques VALLIN; Irina BADURASHVILI (2007). _A Sharp Increase in Sex Ratio at Birth in the Caucasus. Why? How?_. Committee for International Cooperation in National Research in Demography. pp. 73–89. ISBN 978-2-910053-29-1.
  102. **^** Michael, M; King, L; Guo, L; McKee, M; Richardson, E; Stuckler, D (2013), The mystery of missing female children in the Caucasus: an analysis of sex ratios by birth order, International perspectives on sexual and reproductive health, 39 (2), pp. 97–102, ISSN 1944-0391
  103. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ John Bongaarts (2013), The Implementation of Preferences for Male Offspring, Population and Development Review, Volume 39, Issue 2, pages 185–208, June 2013
  104. **^** Stump, Doris (2011), Prenatal Sex Selection, Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men, Council of Europe
  105. **^** Verropoulou and Tsimbos (2010), _Journal of Biosocial Science_ , vol. 42, No. 3, pp. 425–430.
  106. **^** "Abortions of Girls Cause Male Surplus in Montenegro".
  107. **^** Sex Imbalances at Birth: Current trends, consequences and policy implications Archived December 30, 2013, at the Wayback Machine United Nations FPA (August 2012), see page 23
  108. **^** Newport, Frank. "Americans Prefer Boys to Girls, Just as They Did in 1941." Gallup, 23 June 2011. Web. 2 Nov. 2013.
  109. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jesudason, Sujatha, and Anat Shenker-Osorio. "The Atlantic." The Atlantic. N.p., 31 May 2012. Web. 03 Nov. 2013.
  110. **^** "Half Fertility Clinics Allow Parents to Pick Gender." Msnbc.com. Associated Press, 20 Sept. 2006. Web. 03 Nov. 2013.
  111. **^** Savior Siblings: Is PGD Being Regulated?. (2009, June 29). Savior Siblings. Retrieved September 23, 2013, from http://ourethicaljourney09.blogspot.ca/2009/06/is-big-brother-watching-pgd-regulations.html
  112. **^** Roberts, Sam (June 15, 2009). "U.S. Births Hint at Bias for Boys in Some Asians". _The New York Times_. Retrieved May 23, 2010.
  113. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Christophe Z Guilmoto, Sex imbalances at birth Trends, consequences and policy implications Archived June 4, 2012, at Archive-It United Nations Population Fund, Hanoi (October 2011)
  114. **^** World Bank, Engendering Development, The World Bank, (2001)
  115. **^** Austad, Steven N.; Fischer, Kathleen E. (2016). "Sex Differences in Lifespan". _Cell Metabolism_. **23** (6): 1022–1033. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2016.05.019. PMC 4932837. PMID 27304504.
  116. **^** Garenne, M (2002). "Sex ratios at birth in African populations: a review of survey data". _Human Biology_. **74** (6): 889–900. doi:10.1353/hub.2003.0003. PMID 12617497.
  117. **^** Johansson, Sten; Nygren, Olga (1991). "The missing girls of China: a new demographic account". _Population and Development Review_. **17** (1): 35–51. doi:10.2307/1972351. JSTOR 1972351.
  118. **^** Merli, M. Giovanna; Raftery, Adrian E. (2000). "Are births underreported in rural China?". _Demography_. **37** (1): 109–126. doi:10.2307/2648100. JSTOR 2648100. PMID 10748993.
  119. **^** "Burying Babies in China". _Wesleyan Juvenile Offering_. **XXII** : 40. March 1865. Retrieved December 1, 2015.
  120. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Das Gupta, Monica, "Explaining Asia's Missing Women": A New Look at the Data", 2005
  121. **^** Mahalingam, R. (2007). "Culture, ecology, and beliefs about gender in son preference caste groups". _Evolution and Human Behavior_. **28** (5): 319–329. doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2007.01.004.
  122. **^** Gilmartin, Sophie (1997). "The Sati, the Bride, and the Widow: Sacrificial Woman in the Nineteenth Century". _Victorian Literature and Culture_. **25** : 141–158. doi:10.1017/S1060150300004678. JSTOR 25058378.
  123. **^** Arvind Sharma (2001), Sati: Historical and Phenomenological Essays, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120804647, pages 19–21
  124. **^** On attested Rajput practice of sati during wars, see, for example Leslie, Julia; Arnold, David (ed.); Robb, Peter (ed.) (1993). "Suttee or Sati: Victim or Victor?". _Institutions and Ideologies: A SOAS South Asia Reader_. **10**. London: Routledge. p. 46. ISBN 9780700702848.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)
  125. **^** Hughes, Nancy Scheper (1987). _Child Survival: Anthropological Perspectives on the Treatment and Maltreatment of Children_. Springer. p. 99. ISBN 9781556080289.
  126. **^** Wu (2009), p. 86.
  127. **^** Patricia Buckley Ebrey (September 19, 2002). _Women and the Family in Chinese History_. Routledge. pp. 10–12. ISBN 978-0415288224.
  128. **^** Adler, Joseph A. (Winter 2006). "Daughter/Wife/Mother or Sage/Immortal/Bodhisattva? Women in the Teaching of Chinese Religions". _ASIANetwork Exchange, vol. XIV, no. 2_. Retrieved May 18, 2011.
  129. **^** "Dowry | marriage custom".
  130. **^** https://web.archive.org/web/20140313094849/http://india.unfpa.org/drive/LawsandSonPreferenceinIndia.pdf
  131. **^** Rani Jethmalani  & P.K. Dey (1995). _Dowry Deaths and Access to Justice in Kali's Yug: Empowerment, Law and Dowry Deaths_. pp. 36, 38.
  132. **^** Paras Diwan and Peeyushi Diwan (1997). _Law Relating to Dowry, Dowry Deaths, Bride Burning, Rape, and Related Offences_. Delhi: Universal Law Pub. Co. p. 10.
  133. **^** Henneberger, S. "China's One-Child Policy." : History. N.p., 2007. Web. 24 Nov. 2013.
  134. **^** "History of the One-Child Policy." All Girls Allowed, 2013. Web. 25 Nov. 2013.
  135. **^** "China birth rate up after one-child change". _BBC News_. January 23, 2017.
  136. **^** "China’s one-child policy to change in the new year." The Independent, December 29, 2013. Retrieved 30 March 2014. https://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/chinas-onechild-policy-to-change-in-the-new-year-9028601.html.
  137. **^** Cronk, L. (2007). "Boy or girl: Gender preferences from a Darwinian point of view". _Reproductive BioMedicine Online_. **15** : 23–32. doi:10.1016/S1472-6483(10)60546-9. PMID 18088517.
  138. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ Park, Chai Bin; Cho, Nam-Hoon (1995). "Consequences of son preference in a low- fertility society:Imbalance of the sex ratio at birth in Korea". _Population and Development Review_. **21** (1): 59–84. doi:10.2307/2137413. JSTOR 2137413.
  139. **^** Onishi, Norimitsu (February 22, 2007). "Korean Men Use Brokers to Find Brides in Vietnam". _The New York Times_.
  140. **^** Last, Jonathan V. (June 24, 2011). "The War Against Girls". _The Wall Street Journal_.
  141. **^** Ullman, Jodie and Linda Fidell. 1989. "Gender selection and society," " in Joan Offerman- Zuckerberg (ed.), Gender in Transition: A New Frontier. New York: Plenum Medical Book Company, pp. 179–187.
  142. **^** Blake, Judith. 1989. Family Size and Achievement. Berkeley: University of California Press.
  143. **^** Guttentag, M and P Secord. "Too Many Women? The Sex Ratio Question." Sage Publications. 1983.
  144. **^** Keifitz, Nathan. Foreword. In: Bennett NG, editor. Sex selection of children. New York: Academic Press; 1983. p. xi–xiii.
  145. **^** Belanger, Daniele. "Sex-selective abortions: short-term and long-term perspectives"] Reproductive Health Matters 10.19(2002): 194–197. JSTOR 3775793
  146. **^** Goodkind, Daniel (1999). "Should prenatal sex selection be restricted? Ethical questions and their implications for research and policy". _Population Studies_. **53** (1): 49–61. doi:10.1080/00324720308069.
  147. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ https://www.nwlc.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/prendafactsheet.pdf
  148. **^** Eklund, Lisa; Purewal, Navtej (2017). "The bio-politics of population control and sex-selective abortion in China and India" (PDF). _Feminism & Psychology_. **27** : 34–55. doi:10.1177/0959353516682262.
  149. **^** Eklund, Lisa; Purewal, Navtej (2017). "The bio-politics of population control and sex-selective abortion in China and India" (PDF). _Feminism & Psychology_. **27** : 34–55. doi:10.1177/0959353516682262.
  150. **^** Mohapatra, S. (2015). "False Framings: The Co-opting of Sex-Selection by the Anti-Abortion Movement". _The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics : A Journal of the American Society of Law, Medicine & Ethics_. **43** (2): 270–4. doi:10.1111/jlme.12242. PMID 26242948.
  151. **^** Eklund, Lisa; Purewal, Navtej (2017). "The bio-politics of population control and sex-selective abortion in China and India" (PDF). _Feminism & Psychology_. **27** : 34–55. doi:10.1177/0959353516682262.
  152. **^** "Reduce Stigma to Make Women Comfortable Accessing Safe Abortions". August 7, 2018.
  153. **^** "The Politics of Population Control | India | al Jazeera".
  154. **^** Abortions—Number and Rate by Race: 1990 to 2007 Archived September 23, 2015, at the Wayback Machine US Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2012
  155. **^** Abortion Statistics, England and Wales: 2011 Department of Health, UK Government (May 2012), page 3
  156. **^** Facts and figures about abortion in the European Region World Health Organization (2012), Summary Note 4
  157. **^** Weiss, Gail (1995). "Sex-Selective Abortion: A Relational Approach". _Hypatia_. **10** (1): 202–217. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.1995.tb01360.x. JSTOR 3810465.
  158. **^** Warren, Mary Ann. "Gendercide: The Implications of Sex-Selection." Rowman and Allenheld. 1985.
  159. **^** https://www.prochoiceamerica.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/4.-Race-and-Sex-Selection-Abortion-Bans-A-False-Solution-to-the-Real-Problems-of-Racism-and-Sexism.pdf
  160. **^** "Preventing gender-biased sex selection" (PDF). UNFPA. Retrieved November 1, 2011.
  161. **^** "Prenatal sex selection" (PDF). PACE. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 3, 2011. Retrieved November 1, 2011.
  162. **^** Jones, Natasha (October 6, 2012). "MP takes aim at sex selection". _The Langley Times_. Retrieved October 6, 2012.
  163. **^** Mark Kennedy, MP continues push for sex-selection abortions vote after motion rejected, Postmedia News, 2013-03-26
  164. **^** "House debates abortion ban for sex of fetus". _CNN Online_. May 31, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2010.
  165. **^** Steinhauer, Jennifer (May 31, 2012). "House Rejects Bill to Ban Sex-Selective Abortions". _New York Times_. Retrieved May 31, 2010.
  166. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Christie, Bob (May 29, 2013). "Arizona Race And Sex-Selective Abortion Ban Draws ACLU Lawsuit". Archived from the original on May 30, 2013.
  167. **^** "HB 2443: An Act amending Title 13, Chapter 36, Arizona Revised Statutes, by adding section 13-3603.02; ..." (PDF).
  168. **^** "Arizona Revised Statutes, 13-3603.02. Abortion; sex and race selection; injunctive and civil relief; failure to report; definition".
  169. **^** Graham, Georgia (November 4, 2014). "MPs vote to make sex selection abortion illegal".
  170. **^** "Burnham's MP Tessa Munt backs sex-selection abortion bill". thewestcountry.co.uk. December 5, 2014. Retrieved January 5, 2015.
  171. **^** "UK: Sex-Selective Abortions Voted Illegal By Parliament Members". gender-selection.com.au. December 1, 2014. ISSN 2204-3888. Archived from the original on January 5, 2015. Retrieved January 5, 2015.
  172. **^** "Statement on sex-selective abortion". Abortion Rights. September 18, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2014.
  173. **^** "Statement on sex-selective abortion". Spiked.com. May 23, 2014. Retrieved December 12, 2014.
  174. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Song, Jian. 2009. "Rising sex ratio at birth in China: responses and effects of social policies." http://iussp2009.princeton.edu/papers/91145
  175. **^** "'Care For Girls' Gaining Momentum." 'Care For Girls' Gaining Momentum. China Daily, 07 Aug. 2004. Web. 03 Nov. 2013.
  176. **^** "China Makes Sex-Selective Abortions a Crime". _Reproductive Health Matters_. **13** (25): 203. 2005. JSTOR 3776292.
  177. **^** Gender Equality UNICEF (2012)
  178. **^** UNFPA First Agency to Campaign against Sex Selection in China United Nations Population Fund (2012)
  179. **^** MTP and PCPNDT Initiatives Report Archived June 1, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Government of India (2011)
  180. **^** Delhi Laadli scheme 2008 Government of Delhi, India

## External links[edit]

  * _A conference held in Singapore in December 2005 on female deficit in Asia_
  * Sex Selection at Birth; _Statistics Singapore Newsletter, Vol 17 No.3 January 1995_
  * MSNBC – No Girls Please – In parts of Asia, sexism is ingrained and gender selection often means murder
  * Surplus Males and US/China Relations
  * _A Dangerous Surplus of Sons?_ – An analysis of various studies of the lopsided sex ratios in Asian countries
  * Case study: Female Infanticide in India and China
  * Working paper by Emily Oster linking sex ratio imbalances to hepatitis B infection
  * S2 China Report – China: The Effects of the One Child Policy
  * Notification on Addressing in a Comprehensive Way the Issue of Rising Sex Ratio at Birth a UNESCAP document
  * A collection of essays on sex selection in various Asian countries by Attané and Guilmoto
  * Five case studies and a video on sex selection in Asia by UNFPA
  * _NPR, All Things Considered, India Confronts Gender-Selective Abortion, March 21, 2006_
  * _Book Review: Unnatural Selection_ _– The War Against Girls / WSJ.com_

  * v

  * t
  * e

Abortion

* * *

Main topics|

  * History of abortion
  * Methods of abortion
  * Abortion debate
  * Abortion law

Movements|

  * Abortion-rights movements
  * Anti-abortion movements

Issues|

  * Abortion and mental health
  * Beginning of human personhood
  * Beginning of pregnancy controversy
  * Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis
  * Anti-abortion violence
  * Abortion under communism
  * Birth control
  * Crisis pregnancy center
  * Ethical aspects of abortion
  * Eugenics
  * Fetal rights
  * Forced abortion
  * Genetics and abortion
  * Late-term abortion
  * Legalized abortion and crime effect
  * Libertarian perspectives on abortion
  * Limit of viability
  * Men's rights
  * Minors and abortion
  * One-child policy
  * Paternal rights and abortion
  * Philosophical aspects of the abortion debate
  * Prenatal development
  * Reproductive rights
  * Self-induced abortion
  * Sex-selective abortion
  * Sidewalk counseling
  * Societal attitudes towards abortion
  * Toxic abortion
  * Unsafe abortion
  * Women's rights

By country|

| Africa|

  * Algeria
  * Angola
  * Benin
  * Botswana
  * Burkina Faso
  * Burundi
  * Cameroon
  * Cape Verde
  * Central African Republic
  * Chad
  * Egypt
  * Ghana
  * Namibia
  * Nigeria
  * South Africa
  * Uganda
  * Zimbabwe

---|---  
Asia|

  * Afghanistan
  * Armenia
  * Azerbaijan
  * Bahrain
  * Bangladesh
  * Bhutan
  * Brunei
  * Cambodia
  * China
  * Cyprus
  * Georgia
  * East Timor
  * India
  * Iran
  * Israel
  * Japan
  * Kazakhstan
  * Northern Cyprus
  * South Korea
  * Philippines
  * Qatar
  * Saudi Arabia
  * Turkey

Europe|

  * Albania
  * Andorra
  * Austria
  * Belarus
  * Belgium
  * Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * Bulgaria
  * Croatia
  * Czech Republic
  * Denmark
  * Estonia
  * Finland
  * France
  * Germany
  * Greece
  * Hungary
  * Iceland
  * Ireland
  * Italy
  * Kazakhstan
  * Latvia
  * Liechtenstein
  * Lithuania
  * Luxembourg
  * Malta
  * Moldova
  * Monaco
  * Montenegro
  * Netherlands
  * North Macedonia
  * Norway
  * Poland
  * Portugal
  * Romania
  * Russia
  * San Marino
  * Serbia
  * Slovakia
  * Slovenia
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * Ukraine
  * United Kingdom

North America|

  * Belize
  * Canada
  * Costa Rica
  * Cuba
  * Dominican Republic
  * El Salvador
  * Guatemala
  * Mexico
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama
  * Trinidad and Tobago
  * United States

Oceania|

  * Australia
  * Micronesia
  * Fiji
  * Kiribati
  * Marshall Islands
  * New Zealand
  * Papua New Guinea
  * Samoa
  * Solomon Islands
  * Tonga
  * Tuvalu
  * Vanuatu

South America|

  * Argentina
  * Bolivia
  * Brazil
  * Chile
  * Colombia
  * Ecuador
  * Guyana
  * Paraguay
  * Peru
  * Suriname
  * Uruguay
  * Venezuela

Law|

  * Case law
  * Constitutional law
  * History of abortion law
  * Laws by country
  * Buffer zones
  * Conscientious objection
  * Fetal protection
  * Heartbeat bills
  * Informed consent
  * Late-term restrictions
  * Parental involvement
  * Spousal consent

Methods|

  * Vacuum aspiration
  * Dilation and evacuation
  * Dilation and curettage
  * Intact D&X
  * Hysterotomy
  * Instillation
  * Menstrual extraction
  * Abortifacient drugs
    * Methotrexate
    * Mifepristone
    * Misoprostol
    * Oxytocin
  * Self-induced abortion
  * Unsafe abortion

Religion|

  * Buddhism
  * Christianity
    * Catholicism
  * Hinduism
  * Islam
  * Judaism
  * Scientology

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category

  * v

  * t
  * e

Social issues in India

* * *

Economy|

  * Brain drain
  * Communications
  * Famine
  * Farmers' suicides
  * Labour
  * Land reforms
  * Debt bondage
  * National Pension Scheme
  * Poverty
    * BPL
  * Public Distribution System
  * Remittances
  * Reverse brain drain
  * Slums
  * Standard of living
  * Street vendors
  * Transport
  * Urbanisation
  * Unemployment
  * Widening income gap

Education|

  * Literacy
  * Ragging
  * School corporal punishment

Environment|

  * Conservation
  * Global warming
  * Manual scavenging
  * Natural disasters
  * Pollution
  * Water supply and sanitation
  * Water disputes

Family|

  * Cohabitation
  * Divorce
  * Domestic violence
  * Dowry system
  * Family planning
  * Hindu joint family
  * Infertility
  * Nuclear family
  * Polyandry
  * Polygamy

Children|

  * Abortion
  * Child labour
  * Child marriage
  * Child prostitution
  * Child trafficking
  * Female foeticide
  * Female infanticide
  * Street children

Women|

  * Acid throwing
  * Bride burning
  * Devadasi
  * Dowry death
  * Eve teasing
  * Women's health
  * Feminism
  * Menstrual taboo
  * Prostitution
  * Rape
  * Sati
  * Sexism
  * Widows

Caste system|

  * Caste politics
  * Caste-related violence
  * Dalit
  * Reservation

Communalism|

  * Proposed states and territories
  * Ethnic relations
  * Religious conflicts
  * Religious violence
  * Secularism
  * Separatist movements

Crime|

  * Corruption
  * Groom kidnapping
  * Human trafficking
  * Illegal housing
  * Illegal immigration
  * Illegal mining
  * Organised crime
  * Terrorism
  * Vigilantism
  * Cybercrime

Health|

  * Epidemics
  * HIV/AIDS
  * Leprosy
  * Malnutrition
  * Obesity
  * Suicide

Media|

  * Censorship
    * Internet
  * Films about social issues
  * Freedom of expression
  * Social impact of Indian soap opera

Other issues|

  * Feudalism
  * Gambling
  * Sexuality
  * LGBT
    * Homosexuality
    * Hijra
  * Human rights
  * Prohibition
  * Religious and spiritual use of cannabis
  * Superstitions

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sex-
selective_abortion&oldid=899149994"

Categories:

  * Female infanticide
  * Abortion debate
  * Abortion
  * Sexism
  * Sex selection
  * Eugenics

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template other archives
  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter
  * CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list
  * Use mdy dates from March 2014
  * Portal templates with all redlinked portals

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * العربية
  * বাংলা
  * Español
  * فارسی
  * Français
  * Հայերեն
  * हिन्दी
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * मराठी
  * Norsk
  * Português
  * Română
  * Русский
  * தமிழ்
  * Türkçe
  * اردو

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 28 May 2019, at 05:16 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

