

![NASA Logo](/resources/site/nasa_logo.png) ![NASA Climate Kids header

image](/resources/site/header_image.png)

Big Questions

Weather & Climate

Atmosphere

Water

Energy

Plants & Animals

# What Is the Greenhouse Effect?

**The Short Answer:**

The greenhouse effect is a process that occurs when gases in Earth's
atmosphere trap the Sun's heat. This process makes Earth much warmer than it
would be without an atmosphere. The greenhouse effect is one of the things
that makes Earth a comfortable place to live.

![Illustration of the Earth inside a greenhouse.](/review/greenhouse-

effect/earth-in-greenhouse.jpg)

Earth isn't actually inside a greenhouse, but our atmosphere traps the Sun's
heat just like the glass walls of a greenhouse. Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech

## How does the greenhouse effect work?

As you might expect from the name, the greenhouse effect works … like a
greenhouse! A greenhouse is a building with glass walls and a glass roof.
Greenhouses are used to grow plants, such as tomatoes and tropical flowers.

A greenhouse stays warm inside, even during the winter. In the daytime,
sunlight shines into the greenhouse and warms the plants and air inside. At
nighttime, it's colder outside, but the greenhouse stays pretty warm inside.
That's because the glass walls of the greenhouse trap the Sun's heat.

![Illustration of a greenhouse in the snow with rays of sunlight entering it.

The greenhouse is capturing the heat. A snowman is off to the side of the

greenhouse.](/review/greenhouse-effect/greenhouse-traps-heat.jpg)

A greenhouse captures heat from the Sun during the day. Its glass walls trap
the Sun's heat, which keeps plants inside the greenhouse warm — even on cold
nights. Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech

The greenhouse effect works much the same way on Earth. Gases in the
atmosphere, such as carbon dioxide, trap heat just like the glass roof of a
greenhouse. These heat-trapping gases are called greenhouse gases.

During the day, the Sun shines through the atmosphere. Earth's surface warms
up in the sunlight. At night, Earth's surface cools, releasing heat back into
the air. But some of the heat is trapped by the greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere. That's what keeps our Earth a warm and cozy 58 degrees Fahrenheit
(14 degrees Celsius), on average.

![Illustration of the Earth's atmosphere capturing some of the Sun's heat with

a thermometer on the side.](/review/greenhouse-effect/greenhouse-effect-

diagram.jpg)

Earth's atmosphere traps some of the Sun's heat, preventing it from escaping
back into space at night. Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech

## How are humans impacting the greenhouse effect?

Human activities are changing Earth's natural greenhouse effect. Burning
fossil fuels like coal and oil puts more carbon dioxide into our atmosphere.

NASA has observed increases in the amount of carbon dioxide and some other
greenhouse gases in our atmosphere. Too much of these greenhouse gases can
cause Earth's atmosphere to trap more and more heat. This causes Earth to warm
up.

## What reduces the greenhouse effect on Earth?

Just like a glass greenhouse, Earth's greenhouse is also full of plants!
Plants can help to balance the greenhouse effect on Earth. All plants — from
giant trees to tiny phytoplankton in the ocean — take in carbon dioxide and
give off oxygen.

The ocean also absorbs a lot of excess carbon dioxide in the air.
Unfortunately, the increased carbon dioxide in the ocean changes the water,
making it more acidic. This is called ocean acidification.

More acidic water can be harmful to many ocean creatures, such as certain
shellfish and coral. Warming oceans — from too many greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere — can also be harmful to these organisms. Warmer waters are a main
cause of coral bleaching.

![Photograph of a bleached brain coral.](/review/greenhouse-effect/brain-

coral.jpg)

This photograph shows a bleached brain coral. A main cause of coral bleaching
is warming oceans. Ocean acidification also stresses coral reef communities.
Credit: NOAA

![](/resources/site/bottomnav_games.png)

Games

![](/resources/site/bottomnav_activities.png)

Activities

![](/resources/site/bottomnav_people.png)

People

![](/resources/site/bottomnav_videos.png)

Videos

![](/resources/site/bottomnav_mystery.png)

Mystery

**Big Questions**

What does global climate change mean?

What is the big deal with carbon?

What is the greenhouse effect?

How do we know the climate is changing?

What is happening to the oceans?

What can we do to help?

What else do we need to find out?

**Weather & Climate**

Weather

Climate

**Atmosphere**

Air

Carbon

Greenhouse gases

**Water**

Oceans

Rivers

Lakes

**Energy**

Renewable energy

Fossil fuels

**Plants & Animals**

Plants

Animals

![global climate change logo](/resources/site/gcc.png)

Climate Kids is produced by the Earth Science Communications Team at

**NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory** / California Institute of Technology

About Us | Privacy | Image Use

Program Manager: **Heather Doyle**

Contact NASA Climate Kids

Site last updated: May 23rd, 2019

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

