

#### Renewable Technology is using cookies

We use them to give you the best experience. If you continue using our
website, we'll assume that you are happy to receive all cookies on this
website.

ContinueLearn More X

X

Advertise with us

Search

![renewable-logo](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable-logo.png) ![renewable-logo-

mobile](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable-logo-mobile.png)

Search

                    
                                                * Log In
                    

Log InRegisterMarket & Customer Insight

                    
                                                * Register
                            * Advertise with us
                    
                            * __Biofuels
                              * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                            * __Geothermal
                              * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                            * __Hydro
                              * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                            * __Infrastructure
                              * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                            * __Market Data
                              * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                            * __Nuclear
                              * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                            * __Solar
                              * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                            * __Technology
                              * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                            * __Wind
                              * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                            * Home
                            * News
                            * Advertise With Us
                            * Company A-Z
                            * Analysis
                            * About Us
                            * PRODUCTS & SERVICES
                            * Comment
                            * Company Releases
                            * Projects
                            * Contact Us
                            * Events
                            * White Papers
                    

Search

                    
                                                * Biofuels
                    

## Biofuels

                    
                                                  * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                    

Comment

### Colombia fires starting gun on renewable energy projects

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### Severn Trent’s THP plant begins generating green energy from sewage sludge

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### Heineken announces Drop the C programme

                    
                                                * Geothermal
                    

## Geothermal

                    
                                                  * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                    

Comment

### Colombia fires starting gun on renewable energy projects

News

### Seasons Greetings

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### Vestas to deliver seven V112-3.45 MW turbines in South Korea

                    
                                                * Hydro
                    

## Hydro

                    
                                                  * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                    

News

### Seattle City Light selects GE Renewable Energy to rebuild generators for

Boundary plant

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### Seabased secures contract to develop 100MW wave energy project in Ghana

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### Voltalia to develop two hydropower plants in Morocco

                    
                                                * Infrastructure
                    

## Infrastructure

                    
                                                  * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                    

News

### Bermuda General Agency to buy two 20MW wave energy parks

News

### TIU Canada launches 10.7MW solar energy plant in Ukraine

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### AES India and Mitsubishi develop 10MW utility-scale energy storage system

                    
                                                * Market Data
                    

## Market Data

                    
                                                  * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                    

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### Conergy to build solar farm in Vietnam

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### AkzoNobel and Gasunie to convert water into green hydrogen

News

### Seasons Greetings

                    
                                                * Nuclear
                    

## Nuclear

                    
                                                  * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                    

News

### Seasons Greetings

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### Vestas to deliver seven V112-3.45 MW turbines in South Korea

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### Blue Sphere receives €152m grant to develop biogas project in Netherlands

                    
                                                * Solar
                    

## Solar

                    
                                                  * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                    

Comment

### Iraq hopes third time lucky for competitive IPPs

Comment

### China to overtake Spain by 2024 as the country with the world's largest

CSP capacity

Comment

### India levies anti-dumping duty on solar cell component from four nations

                    
                                                * Technology
                    

## Technology

                    
                                                  * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                    

Comment

### Asia Pacific wind turbines will need to weather the storm

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### Anaergia starts construction of biogas plant in Japan

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### NASA seeks proposals for reliable solar power systems to operate on Mars

                    
                                                * Wind
                    

## Wind

                    
                                                  * Projects
                              * Analysis
                              * News
                              * White Papers
                              * Suppliers
                              * Comment
                    

Comment

### Asia Pacific wind turbines will need to weather the storm

Comment

### Colombia fires starting gun on renewable energy projects

![](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/11/renewable.jpg)

News

### Siemens Gamesa to support two onshore wind farms in South Africa

                    
                                                * All
                    

## All sections

                    
                                                  * Home
                              * News
                              * Advertise With Us
                              * Company A-Z
                              * Analysis
                              * About Us
                              * PRODUCTS & SERVICES
                              * Comment
                              * Company Releases
                              * Projects
                              * Contact Us
                              * Events
                              * White Papers
                    
                            * Trending:
                    
                            * Biofuels
                            * Geothermal
                    

×

                    
                                                * # Antelope Valley Solar Ranch One, California
                    

Share

* * *

### Type

Solar photovoltaic power project

### Installed Capacity

230MW

### Location

North Los Angeles County, California, USA

### Developer / Owner

First Solar / Exelon

### Construction Began

August 2011

### Developer

First Solar

Expand

![The Antelope Valley Solar Ranch One project will have an installed capacity

of 230MW. Photo: Business Wire.](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/12/1-image-21.jpg)

The Antelope Valley Solar Ranch One project will have an installed capacity of
230MW. Photo: Business Wire.

![A peak generating capacity of 100MW was connected to the grid in February

2013. Image courtesy of First Solar.](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-
content/uploads/sites/29/2017/12/2-image-21.jpg)

A peak generating capacity of 100MW was connected to the grid in February
2013. Image courtesy of First Solar.

![Initial construction of the renewable project began in August 2011. Photo:

Business Wire.](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/29/2017/12/3-image-21.jpg)

Initial construction of the renewable project began in August 2011. Photo:
Business Wire.

![antelope-valley](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/static-progressive/2-image.jpg)

The Antelope Valley Solar Ranch One (AV Solar Ranch One) is a ground-mount
solar photovoltaic (PV) power project with an installed capacity of 230MW. The
project is located in the Antelope Valley in North Los Angeles County of
California, USA.

The AV Solar Ranch One project is owned by Exelon Power, a subsidiary of
Exelon Corporation. First Solar is responsible for the construction, operation
and maintenance of the project, which is estimated to cost about $1.36bn.

Initial construction works for the renewable project began in August 2011. A
peak generating capacity of 100MW was connected to the grid in February 2013.
The solar farm is expected to produce enough power to meet the needs of 75,000
homes annually.

"The solar PV project will result in an annual reduction of about 140,000t of
CO2 emissions, which is equivalent to removing 3,000 cars from the roads."

The solar PV project will result in an annual reduction of about 140,000t of
CO2 emissions, which is equivalent to removing 3,000 cars from the roads. It
will have low environmental impact with no air emissions, waste production,
minimal noise and low visual impact. It will also support California's goal of
securing at least 33% of its electricity from renewable energy sources by
2020.

## **History of AV Solar Ranch One project**

Development of AV Solar Ranch One was originally initiated by NextLight
Renewable Power. Planning for the project began in 2009, application for the
Zoning/ZUP was submitted in March 2009 and the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA) Notice of Preparation was filed in April 2009.

First Solar became the developer of the project through acquisition of
NextLight Renewable Power in July 2010.

Provisional permission for the solar power plant was issued by the statutory
authorities in 2010. The final environmental approval for the construction was
given in January 2011. The project was acquired by Exelon Corporation in
September 2011. First Solar will, however, remain as the developer of the
facility.

## **Financing for the AV Solar Ranch One project**

The AV Solar Ranch One project is supported by a loan guarantee of $646m,
which was approved by the US Department of Energy (DOE) in September 2011. DOE
provided the first advance of the guaranteed loan in April 2012.

## **Details and construction**

The AV Solar Ranch One plant covers 2,100 acres (850ha) of fallow farmland
near Lancaster in the Antelope Valley area of the Western Mojave Desert. The
project comprises 3.8million of alternating-current (AC) PV modules.
Installation of modules began in June 2012 and approximately one million solar
panels were installed by September 2012.

"The plant would employ 400 local workers during construction and 15 during
operations and maintenance."

The plant would employ 400 local workers during construction and 15 during
operations and maintenance.

## **Generation and sale of power from AV Solar Ranch One**

The clean, renewable power generated from AV Solar Ranch One will be sent to
Southern California's Whirlwind substation that is located about three miles
(4.8km) away from the plant site.

The electricity generated from the plant will be purchased by Pacific Gas and
Electric Company (PG&E) under a 25-year power purchase agreement, which has
been approved by the California Public Utilities Commission.

## **Technology used**

The power project will use First Solar's FS Series 3 PV Module platform. The
FS Series 3 PV Module features thin film cadmium telluride (CdTe) solar
panels, which can be recycled at the end of their lifespan. Each PV module
measures 1,200mm in length, 600mm in width, and 6.8mm in thickness.

The solar module uses a thin-layered semiconductor material formed from
cadmium and tellurium (Cd-Te). The material is placed in between two glass
sheets.

A tracking system deployed on a portion of the plant will tilt the solar
panels according to the Sun's movement to optimise the electricity production.
A new type of inverters with voltage regulation and monitoring technologies
will be installed at the plant to enhance the plant efficiency and
reliability.

![NRI Energy Technology](https://www.renewable-technology.com/wp-

content/uploads/static-

progressive/nri/LinkedIn%20images/LI%20energy%20project.gif)

### Most Read

                    
                                                1. Capital Dynamics signs deal for equity participation in two CSolar solar plants in US
                            2. Quinbrook to build 690MW solar power project in Nevada
                            3. Conergy to build solar farm in Vietnam
                    

####

                    
                                                * About Us
                            * Editorial Standards
                            * Contact Us
                            * Company A-Z
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Terms and Conditions
                    

(C) Copyright 2019 Verdict Media Limited.

Go Top

__

                    
                                                * Lost Password Back ⟶
                            * Login
                            * Register
                    

Get new password

Lost Password?

Login

Registration is disabled.

![DCSIMG](https://wtvertnet.com/dcsp4afj09e7kfaqyrpdqeuho_1t1t/njs.gif?dcsuri=/nojavascript&WT.js=No&WT.tv=9.4.0&dcssip=www.www.renewable-

technology.com)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

