

Skip to content

![Universe Today](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/cropped-delta_iv_heavy_streak_composite_edits.jpg)

![Universe Today](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/cropped-cleanutlogo-1.png)

Universe Today

Space and astronomy news

![Ozone layer hole. Image credit: NASA](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2009/03/ozone-hole1.jpg)

Posted on January 20, 2010December 24, 2015 by Jerry Coffey

# Causes Of Ozone Depletion

There are two different types of ozone depletion, both are very similar. The
first one has been a slow, but steady ozone depletion of 4% per decade of the
Earth’s stratosphere(ozone layer). This has been happening constantly since
the 1970’s. The other is a much larger, although seasonal loss of ozone over
the polar regions. This yearly occurrence is called the ozone hole. There are
many causes for ozone depletion, but the most important process in both trends
is catalytic destruction of ozone by atomic chlorine and bromine. Both come
from the breaking down of chloroflourocarbons(freons) by photons in the
atmosphere.

Chloroflourocarbons(CFC) are the ”big dog” as far as causes of ozone depletion
are concerned. CFC’s are man made chemicals that are very stable in the
atmosphere. They take from 20 to 120 years to break down. All the while they
are destroying ozone molecules. This is what happens: CFCs do not fall back to
Earth with rain, nor are they destroyed by other chemicals. Because of their
relative stability, CFCs rise into the stratosphere where they are eventually
broken down by ultraviolet (UV) rays from the Sun. This causes them to release
free chlorine. The chlorine reacts with oxygen which leads to the chemical
process of destroying ozone molecules. The net result is that two molecules of
ozone are replaced by three of molecular oxygen leaving. The chlorine then
reacts again with the oxygen molecules to destroy the ozone and the process
repeats 100,000 times per molecule. While naturally occurring chlorine has the
same effect on the ozone layer, it has a shorter life span in the atmosphere.

Of all of the causes of ozone depletion, the release of CFCs is thought to
have accounted for 80% of all stratospheric ozone depletion. With great
forethought, the developed world has phased out the use of CFCs in response to
international agreements, like the Montreal Protocol, to protect the ozone
layer. On the downside though, because CFCs remain in the atmosphere so long,
the ozone layer will not fully repair itself until at least the middle of the
21st century.

The Montreal Protocol is an international agreement to address the causes of
ozone depletion. While several substances were addressed, CHCs and HCFCs were
the main ones that the international community agreed to phase out of
production. The protocol also developed a fund to help underdeveloped
countries to find other methods of production so that they could stop using
CFCs and HCFCs, also.

There is a good article about the causes of ozone depletion and the Montreal
Protocol at this link. Here on Universe Today we have a great article about
what the ozone is and means to us. Astronomy Cast offers a good episode that
describes what could happen if we lose enough of our ozone.

### Share this:

                    
                                                * Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
                            * Click to share on Pocket (Opens in new window)
                            * Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
                            * Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
                            * Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)
                            * Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)
                            * Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
                            * Click to print (Opens in new window)
                            * More
                            *             * Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)
                            * ### Like this:
                    

Like Loading...

CategoriesAstronomy, Guide to Space Tagscauses of ozone depletion

## Post navigation

Previous PostPrevious What is the Boltzmann Constant?

Next PostNext Planetary Nebulae

![Member Log in](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/members-1.png)  
![Join our Patreon community](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/patreon.png)  
Join our 836 patrons! See no ads on this site, see our videos early, special
bonus material, and much more. Join us at patreon.com/universetoday

![](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/bookcover-e1540500928777.jpg) **Get our new book!**

Search for: Search

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Members
                            * Guide to Space
                            * Carnival
                            * Photos
                            * Videos
                            * Forum
                            * Contact
                            * Privacy
                    

## Follow Us

                    
                                                * Twitter
                            * Instagram
                            * YouTube
                            * Facebook
                            * RSS Feed
                            * Twitch
                    

Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website,
you agree to their use.  
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here: Cookie Policy

Privacy Policy Proudly powered by WordPress

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address
![loading](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

%d bloggers like this:

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

