

Skip to main content

# National Snow and Ice Data Center

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Data
                    

Data Sets for Research

                    
                                                  * Brightness Temperature
                              * Glaciers
                              * Ice Sheets
                              * Permafrost
                              * Sea Ice
                              * Soil Moisture
                              * Snow
                              * ...search for more
                    

Scientific Data Search

Support for Researchers

                    
                                                  * Analysis & Imaging Tools
                              * Data Announcements
                              * Submit Your Data
                              * Data Policies
                              * User Support
                    

Data for Everyone

                    
                                                  * Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis
                              * Glacier Photograph Collection
                              * Greenland Ice Sheet Today
                              * MASIE (Daily sea ice extent)
                              * Satellite Observations of Arctic Change
                              * Sea Ice Index
                              * Virtual Globes: Google Earth
                    

Sponsored Programs

                    
                                                  * Antarctic Glaciological Data Center
                              * Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA)
                              * NOAA at NSIDC
                              * NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC)
                    

Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere.

                    
                                                * Research
                    
                              * ![](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/about/researcher-100.jpg)Scientists
                              * ![](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/about/asina-100.jpg)Research Grants
                              * ![](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/about/publications-100.jpg)Scientific Publications
                              * ![](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/about/informatics-100.jpg)Informatics Research
                              * ![](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/about/research-group-100.jpg)NSIDC Scientific Expeditions
                    

_On Thin Ice:_  
Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf

![](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/cryosphere/education-

resources/0508_cold_thumb.jpg) Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a
glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ...

                    
                                                * News
                    

For the Media

                    
                                                  * Newsroom: For the Media
                    

For Data Users

                    
                                                  * Data Announcements
                              * The Drift
                    

Current Conditions

                    
                                                  * Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis
                              * Greenland Today
                              * Satellite Observations of Arctic Change
                    

NSIDC In the News

Events

NSIDC Monthly Highlights

![NSIDC Facebook](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/news/facebook-25px.png)![NSIDC

Twitter](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/news/twitter-25px.png)![NSIDC RSS News

Feed](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/news/rss-25px.png)

_Icelights:_ Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate

![](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/news/icon-icelights.jpg) What's hot in the
news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now?
Read more...

                    
                                                * About
                    

About NSIDC

                    
                                                  * NSIDC People
                              * Our Sponsors
                              * Jobs
                              * NSIDC Monthly Highlights
                              * Use & Copyright
                              * Contact Us
                              * Support NSIDC
                              * NSIDC's Green Data Center
                    

About the Cryosphere

                    
                                                  * Quick Facts
                              * All About The Cryosphere
                              * All About Glaciers
                              * All About Snow
                              * All About Frozen Ground
                              * All About Sea Ice
                              * All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology
                              * Snow, Ice and Climate Change
                              * Studying the Cryosphere
                              * Photo Gallery
                              * Educational Resources
                              * Cryosphere Glossary
                    

What is the Cryosphere?

![](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/cryosphere/education-

resources/0508_cold_thumb.jpg)When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they
mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or
snow. Read more ...

Web pagesData Sets

# All About Arctic Climatology and Meteorology

                    
                                                * Introduction
                              * What is the Arctic?
                              * Arctic Phenomena
                            * Arctic Weather and Climate
                              * Climate vs. Weather
                              * Factors Affecting Arctic Weather and Climate
                              * Effects of Arctic Weather and Climate
                              * Patterns in Arctic Weather and Climate
                              * Climate Change in the Arctic
                            * Arctic People
                            * Studying Arctic Climate
                            * Further Reading
                            * About This Site
                            * Photo Gallery
                            * How to Cite
                    

# Climate vs. Weather

                    
                                                * What is the difference between weather and climate?
                            * How do you predict weather and climate?
                            * What's the Arctic climate like?
                    

### What is the difference between weather and climate?

**Weather** is the day-to-day state of the atmosphere, and its short-term
variation in minutes to weeks. People generally think of weather as the
combination of temperature, humidity, precipitation, cloudiness, visibility,
and wind. We talk about changes in weather in terms of the near future: "How
hot is it right now?" "What will it be like today?" and "Will we get a
snowstorm this week?"

**Climate** is the weather of a place averaged over a period of time, often 30
years. Climate information includes the statistical weather information that
tells us about the normal weather, as well as the range of weather extremes
for a location.

We talk about climate change in terms of years, decades, and centuries.
Scientists study climate to look for trends or cycles of variability, such as
the changes in wind patterns, ocean surface temperatures and precipitation
over the equatorial Pacific that result in El Niño and La Niña, and also to
place cycles or other phenomena into the bigger picture of possible longer
term or more permanent climate changes.

![Synoptic

Chart](https://nsidc.org/sites/nsidc.org/files/images//synoptic_chart.gif)![Synoptic

Chart

Key](https://nsidc.org/sites/nsidc.org/files/images//frontal_symbols_horz.gif)

Example of a synoptic chart for 28 August 1980. — _Credit: M. Serreze and R.
Barry (1988)_.

### Forecasting weather and predicting climate

Weather forecasters try to answer questions like: What will the temperature be
tomorrow? Will it rain? How much rain will we have? Will there be
thunderstorms? Today, most weather forecasts are based on models, which
incorporate observations of air pressure, temperature, humidity and winds to
produce the best estimate of current and future conditions in the atmosphere.
A weather forecaster then looks at the model output to figure out the most
likely scenario. The accuracy of weather forecasts depend on both the model
and on the forecaster's skill. Short-term weather forecasts are accurate for
up to a week. Long-term forecasts, for example seasonal forecasts, tend to use
statistical relationships between large-scale climate signals such as El Niño
and La Niña and precipitation and temperature to predict what the weather will
be like in one to six months time.

Climate predictions take a much longer-term view. These predictions try to
answer questions like how much warmer will the Earth be 50 to 100 years from
now? How much more precipitation will there be? How much will sea level rise?
Climate predictions are made using global climate models. Unlike weather
forecast models, climate models cannot use observations because there are no
observations in the future.

### Arctic climate

Like other places on Earth, the weather in the Arctic varies from day to day,
from month to month, and from place to place. But the Arctic is a unique place
for weather and climate, because of the special factors that influence it.
Sunlight is perhaps the most important of those factors. Above the Arctic
Circle, the sun disappears in the winter, leaving the region dark and cold.
What light does reach the region in the winter comes in at a low angle. In
summers, the sun shines around the clock, bringing warmth and light. The
Arctic also experiences frequent **inversions**. Inversions occur when cold
air settles close to the ground, with warm air on top of it. Inversions
separate the air into two layers, like oil and water: this tends to slow down
the winds close to the surface. Over cities, inversions can trap pollutants,
creating smoggy conditions that last until the inversion clears.

![Inversion Layer from

Airplane](https://nsidc.org/sites/nsidc.org/files/images//inversion_layer_small.jpg)

Photo of an inversion layer. — _Credit: Willie Angus_.

Scientists separate the Arctic into two major climate types. Near the ocean, a
**maritime** climate prevails. In Alaska, Iceland, and northern Russia and
Scandinavia, the winters are stormy and wet, with snow and rainfall reaching
60 cm (24 inches) to 125 cm (49 inches) each year. Summers in the coastal
regions tend to be cool and cloudy; average temperatures hover around 10
degrees Celsius (50 degrees Fahrenheit).

Away from the coasts, the interior regions of the Arctic lands have a
continental climate. The weather is dryer, with less snow in the winter and
sunny summer days. Winter weather can be severe, with frigid temperatures well
below freezing. In some regions of Siberia, average January temperatures are
lower than -40 degrees Celsius (-40 degrees Fahrenheit). In the summer, the
long days of sunshine thaw the top layer of **permafrost** and bring average
temperatures above 10 degrees Celsius (50 degrees Fahrenheit). At some weather
stations in the interior, summer temperatures are warmer than 30 degrees
Celsius (86 degrees Fahrenheit).

## Find Data

                    
                                                * Search NSIDC Data
                            * NASA Earthdata Search
                            * IceBridge Portal
                            * Data Collections List
                    

## Stay Current

                    
                                                * Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis 
                            * Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data)
                            * MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source)
                            * Greenland Today
                            * Newsroom
                    

## Learn About Snow and Ice

                    
                                                * Icelights: Answers to Your Questions
                            * Cryosphere Quick Facts 
                            * All About Glaciers
                            * All About Snow 
                            * All About Sea Ice
                            * Arctic Climatology - A Primer
                    

## Get Help

                    
                                                * Knowledge Base
                    

## Etc.

                    
                                                * Use & Copyright 
                            * Web Policy 
                            * Jobs
                    

![Facebook](/images/social-media/facebook16x16.png) ![Twitter](/images/social-

media/twitter16x16.png)

![NSIDC logo](/images/nsidc_logo-footer.svg) Home | Contact Us  
© 2019, **National Snow and Ice Data Center** :: _Advancing knowledge of
Earth's frozen regions_

![ICSU World Data System](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/logos/icsu-wds-navy-

bk.svg) ![Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences

\(CIRES\)](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/logos/cires-navy-background.svg)
![University of Colorado Boulder](/sites/nsidc.org/files/images/logos/cu-

white-text.svg)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

