

Sections

SEARCH

Skip to contentSkip to site index

Science

SubscribeLog In

Log In

Today’s Paper

Science|Why Do We Inherit Mitochondrial DNA Only From Our Mothers?

  *     *       *         *           * 

Advertisement

Supported by

# Why Do We Inherit Mitochondrial DNA Only From Our Mothers?

Image![](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2016/06/24/science/23MITOCHONDRIA/23MITOCHONDRIA-

articleLarge.jpg?quality=75&auto=webp&disable=upscale)

Mitochondria in hepatocyte cells of the liver, shown in
yellow.CreditCreditBsip/UIG, via Getty Images

By Steph Yin

  * June 23, 2016
  *     *       *         *           *             * 

For a long time, biologists thought our DNA resided only in the control center
of our cells, the nucleus.

Then, in 1963, a couple at Stockholm University discovered DNA outside the
nucleus. Looking through an electron microscope, Margit and Sylvan Nass
noticed DNA fibers in structures called mitochondria, the energy centers of
our cells.

Our mitochondrial DNA accounts for a small portion of our total DNA. It
contains just 37 of the 20,000 to 25,000 protein-coding genes in our body. But
it is notably distinct from DNA in the nucleus. Unlike nuclear DNA, which
comes from both parents, mitochondrial DNA comes only from the mother.

Nobody fully understands why or how fathers’ mitochondrial DNA gets wiped from
cells. An international team of scientists recently studied mitochondria in
the sperm of a roundworm called C. elegans to find answers.

Their results, published this week in the journal Science, show that paternal
mitochondria in this type of roundworm have an internal self-destruct
mechanism that gets activated when a sperm fuses with an egg. Delaying this
mechanism, the scientists found, led to lower rates of embryo survival. Down
the road, this information could help scientists better understand certain
diseases and possibly improve in vitro fertilization techniques.

This work “comes closest to elucidating a key development process that has
perplexed us for a long time,” said Justin St. John, a professor at the Hudson
Institute of Medical Research in Australia, who was not involved in the
research.

It’s well known that the transfer of mitochondrial DNA from mother to
offspring, often called maternal inheritance, occurs in humans and most
multicellular organisms. Maternal inheritance is what allows genetic testing
services like 23andMe to trace our maternal ancestries. You inherited your
mitochondrial DNA from your mother, who inherited hers from her mother and so
forth.

Maternal inheritance also gave rise to the idea that there exists a
“Mitochondrial Eve,” a woman from whom all living humans inherited their
mitochondrial DNA.

Before this research, it had been thought that maternal inheritance was
orchestrated by processes in the mother’s egg cells, said Ding Xue, a
professor at the University of Colorado Boulder and one of the authors of the
paper. Large structures called autophagosomes, for instance, are known to
engulf paternal mitochondria shortly after a sperm penetrates an egg.

Dr. Xue and his colleagues found, however, that the paternal mitochondria in
the roundworms actually started to break down before any autophagosomes
reached them. “It’s like a suicide mechanism,” said Byung-Ho Kang, a professor
at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and another author of the paper.

The researchers identified a gene, called cps-6, that seemed to initiate the
breakdown process within paternal mitochondria. They found that deleting cps-6
caused paternal mitochondria to linger longer in the embryo. It also led to
higher rates of embryonic death.

“This paper provides the first experimental data suggesting that it’s not good
to keep sperm mitochondrial DNA,” said Vincent Galy, a researcher at Pierre
and Marie Curie University in Paris, who was not involved in the study.

It’s unclear whether having some paternal mitochondrial DNA in our cells leads
to health problems. To date, there’s been one reported possible case, detailed
in 2002 by researchers in Denmark. In a man with mitochondrial myopathy, a
neuromuscular disease, the scientists discovered a mutation on mitochondrial
DNA that came from his father. It’s possible, however, that the mutation
occurred spontaneously after conception, rather than being inherited directly
from his father.

Further research could shed light on diseases caused by mitochondrial DNA,
which can lead to blindness, nerve damage and dementia, Dr. Xue said. Because
it’s a somewhat lengthy screening process, doctors don’t generally check
patients for the inheritance of paternal mitochondria. But “as we do more
studies, we might actually find that it’s closely related to some human
diseases,” Dr. Xue said.

More studies could also expand understanding of an in vitro fertilization
technique that involves injecting a single sperm directly into an egg. Some
researchers have studied whether this technique leads to the presence of sperm
mitochondrial DNA in the embryo, but “there are contradictory results,” Dr.
Galy said.

The big mystery that remains is why maternal inheritance occurs so
consistently across organisms, Dr. Xue said. One theory has to do with the
fact that sperm must generate a lot of energy when competing to fertilize an
egg. During this time, sperm mitochondria are overworked, which could possibly
damage their DNA and lead to mutations.

But this theory, and all others, are still speculative, Dr. Xue said. “This is
a longstanding biological question,” he said. “There must be a fundamental,
important reason why most species actually adopt the same style of
mitochondrial inheritance.”

Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times
newsletter.

  *     *       *         * 

Advertisement

## Site Index

Go to Home Page »

news

  * home page
  * world
  * U.S.
  * politics
  * New York
  * business
  * tech
  * science
  * climate
  * sports
  * obituaries
  * the upshot
  * today's paper
  * corrections

opinion

  * today's opinion
  * op-ed columnists
  * editorials
  * op-ed Contributors
  * letters
  * sunday review
  * video: opinion

arts

  * today's arts
  * art & design
  * books
  * dance
  * movies
  * music
  * Pop Culture
  * television
  * theater
  * watching
  * video: arts

living

  * automobiles
  * Cooking
  * crossword
  * education
  * food
  * health
  * jobs
  * magazine
  * parenting
  * real estate
  * style
  * t magazine
  * travel
  * weddings

listings & more

  * Reader Center
  * Wirecutter
  * Live Events
  * The Learning Network
  * tools & services
  * N.Y.C. events guide
  * multimedia
  * photography
  * video
  * Newsletters
  * NYT store
  * times journeys
  * manage my account

### news

  * home page
  * world
  * U.S.
  * politics
  * New York
  * business
  * tech
  * science
  * climate
  * sports
  * obituaries
  * the upshot
  * today's paper
  * corrections

### opinion

  * today's opinion
  * op-ed columnists
  * editorials
  * op-ed Contributors
  * letters
  * sunday review
  * video: opinion

### arts

  * today's arts
  * art & design
  * books
  * dance
  * movies
  * music
  * Pop Culture
  * television
  * theater
  * watching
  * video: arts

### living

  * automobiles
  * Cooking
  * crossword
  * education
  * food
  * health
  * jobs
  * magazine
  * parenting
  * real estate
  * style
  * t magazine
  * travel
  * weddings

### more

  * Reader Center
  * Wirecutter
  * Live Events
  * The Learning Network
  * tools & services
  * N.Y.C. events guide
  * multimedia
  * photography
  * video
  * Newsletters
  * NYT store
  * times journeys
  * manage my account

### Subscribe

  * home delivery
  * digital subscriptions
  * Crossword
  * Cooking

  * email newsletters

  * corporate subscriptions
  * education rate

  * mobile applications

  * replica edition

## Site Information Navigation

  * © 2019 The New York Times Company

  * Contact Us

  * Work with us
  * Advertise
  * Your Ad Choices
  * Privacy
  * Terms of Service
  * Terms of Sale
  * Site Map
  * Help
  * Help
  * Subscriptions

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

