
                    
                                                * ![Home](/static/theme/recharge/base/gfx/house_icon.svg)
                            * Menu 
                              * ###  Sections
                    
                                * Home 
                                * Wind 
                                * Transition 
                                * Markets 
                                * Circuit 
                                * Technology 
                                * In Depth 
                                * Thought Leaders 
                                * Galleries 
                                * Editions 
                                * Archive
                    

### Regions

                    
                                                    * Americas 
                                * Europe 
                                * Middle East & Africa 
                                * Asia Pacific
                    

### More

                    
                                                    * About Us 
                                * Contact Us 
                                * Subscribe 
                                * Privacy 
                                * Daily Newsletter 
                                * Recharge Agenda 
                                * Sponsor Content 
                                * Jobs 
                                * Advertise 
                                * Events 
                                * RSS
                    
                            * Search 
                              * ###  Search Recharge
                    

__

                    
                                                * ![Recharge](/static/theme/recharge/base/gfx/Recharge_logo_for_mobile_nav.svg)
                            * LOG IN 
                              * ###  LOG IN TO Recharge
                    

New user? **Subscribe now**  
Forgot your password?

                    
                                                * Subscribe 
                            * MYRE 
                              * ###  My Recharge
                    
                                * Go to My Recharge
                                * Log out
                            * WIND 
                            * Transition 
                            * Markets 
                            * Technology 
                            * Circuit 
                            * Careers 
                            * Editions
                    

![recharge](https://static.rechargenews.com/static/theme/recharge/base/gfx/Recharge_masthead.svg)
![recharge](https://static.rechargenews.com/static/theme/recharge/base/gfx/Recharge_masthead.svg)
![recharge](https://static.rechargenews.com/static/theme/recharge/base/gfx/RE_mobile_text.png)

            * Friday, 07 Jun 2019 - 
                        
                                                    * WIND 
                            * Transition 
                            * Markets 
                            * Technology 
                            * Circuit 
                            * Careers 
                            * Editions
                        

## Solar

More

![](https://static.rechargenews.com/incoming/article833228.ece5/ALTERNATES/LANDSCAPE_180/AV%20Solar%20Ranch%20One.jpg)
Photo: NextLight Renewable Power

# PG&E signs up for 230MW from proposed solar project

NextLight Renewable Power, a utility scale solar energy developer, has a buyer
for electricity from its proposed AV Solar Ranch One project.

by Benjamin Romano

08 June 2009 Updated 26 September 2016

Share: __E-mail

×

#### E-mail this to a friend.

Hey, I saw this on Recharge and thought it might be interesting for you.

Cancel Send It!

Pacific Gas & Electric, a California investor-owned that has been a voracious
purchaser of solar, announced a contract for 230 megawatts of power from the
project, slated for 2,100 acres of unused farmland about 80 kilometres north
of Los Angeles.

NextLight submitted a zoning application in March and county planners held an
initial public meeting last month on environmental issues at the site, which
is near the Antelope Valley California Poppy Reserve. Local topography screens
the proposed project from the reserve and an environmental group associated
with the reserve has told a local newspaper it is not opposing the
development.

NextLight intends to install single-axis tracking solar photovoltaic panels
beginning in October 2010, according to its schedule. The project would come
online in 2011 and be fully operational by the end of 2013.

The developer is a subsidiary of private equity firm Energy Capital Partners
(ECP), which closed its debut fund in late 2006 with $2.25 billion dedicated
to investments in conventional and renewable generation, transmission and
storage. NextLight is pursuing several utility-scale solar developments in the
western US, though it says it’s also open to other renewable energy
technologies.

Among ECP’s other investments is a minority stake in thin-film solar panel
manufacturer Nanosolar.

                    
                                                * Americas
                    

### Latest

                    
                                                * ##  Iberdrola plans Europe's largest solar power plant in Spain
                    
                            * ##  'UK can't hit net-zero emissions pre-2050,' policy chief tells Extinction Rebellion
                    
                            * ##  ‘Germany must add 100GW renewables to hit 2030 goal’: BDEW
                    
                            * ##  Anheuser-Busch greens Budweiser with record solar deal
                    
                            * ##  Brazil taps bioenergy and solar to power captive Amazon state
                    

Read more

                    
                                                * ###  RELATED NEWS
                    
                            * ##  PG&E Brightsource deal breaks solar contract record
                    

Americas

13 May 2009

                    
                                                * ##  PG&E to tap space solar power in 15-year contract
                    

Americas

14 Apr 2009

                    
                                                * ##  California's PG&E launches 500MW solar power initiative
                    

Americas

24 Feb 2009

NHST Global Publications AS use technologies such as cookies and other
tracking scripts to analyse trends, administer our services, track user
movements and to gather information about our whole user base. Unregistered
users may opt-out of such tracking in the browser settings by ticking off “do
not track me”. Read our cookie policy here.

Advertise Terms About us Contact us Privacy

__LinkedIn __Twitter __Facebook

![one pixel graphics](https://stage.upstreamonline.com/analysis-

logger/Logger?rt=1&ctxId=1162&contextPath=1110-1162-&pubId=4&cat=&meta=read-

news&objId=861087&type=article&title=PG%26amp%3bamp%3bE+signs+up+for+230MW+from+proposed+solar+project&url=https%3a%2f%2fwww.rechargenews.com%2fsolar%2f861087%2fpgandampe-

signs-up-for-230mw-from-proposed-solar-project)

![one pixel graphics](https://stage.upstreamonline.com/analysis-

logger/Logger?contextPath=1110-1162-&cat=region%40rechargenews.com%2c2016&objId=378939300&title=Americas&url=tag%3aregion%40rechargenews.com%2c2016%3aamericas&rt=1&ctxId=1162&pubId=4&meta=tag-

hit&type=tag)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

