

![USA TODAY](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/usatoday/images/site-masthead-

logo-dark@2x.png)

SUBSCRIBE NOWto get home delivery

                    
                                                * ![USA TODAY](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/usatoday/images/site-nav-logo-dark@2x.png)
                            * News
                            * Sports
                            * Life
                            * Money
                            * Tech
                            * Travel
                            * Opinion
                            * Weather
                    

Icon

                    
                                                  * Humidity
                              * Precip.
                              * Winds
                    

Open settings

Settings

Enter City Name

Cancel

Set

Close settings

Full Forecast

                    
                                                * Crosswords
                            * Investigations
                            * Newsletters
                            * Humankind
                            * Apps
                            * Best-Selling Books
                            * Cartoons
                            * Classifieds
                            * Corrections
                            * Interactives
                            * Job Network
                            * Moonlighting
                            * Newsstand
                            * News tips
                            * Photo galleries
                            * Podcasts
                            * Policing the USA
                            * Scores
                            * Storytellers Project
                            * Thanksgiving
                            * Washington
                            * Video
                            * VRtually There
                            * More
                    
                              * News
                              * Sports
                              * Life
                              * Money
                              * Tech
                              * Travel
                              * Opinion
                              * Weather
                              * Crosswords
                              * Investigations
                              * Newsletters
                              * Humankind
                              * Apps
                              * Best-Selling Books
                              * Cartoons
                              * Classifieds
                              * Corrections
                              * Interactives
                              * Job Network
                              * Moonlighting
                              * Newsstand
                              * News tips
                              * Photo galleries
                              * Podcasts
                              * Policing the USA
                              * Scores
                              * Storytellers Project
                              * Thanksgiving
                              * Washington
                              * Video
                              * VRtually There
                    
                            * search
                    
                            *             * Subscribe
                            * salutation
                    
                              * Manage Account
                              * Access e-Edition
                              * Newsletters
                              * Pay Bill
                              * Report Delivery Issues
                              * Pause Delivery
                              * Help Center
                              * Sign Out
                    

Have an existing account?

Sign In

Already have a subscription?

Activate Your Account

Don't have an account?

Create One

Get the news

###### Share This Story!

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

FacebookEmailTwitterGoogle+LinkedInPinterest

#### A dozen ways life on Earth could end

There are at least 12 ways humanity could be wiped out. But even if we avoid
those, one day our sun will die.

![Loading…](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/usatoday/usat-web-

static-5005.48.0/images/indicators/facebook-loading.gif)Post to Facebook

A dozen ways life on Earth could end There are at least 12 ways humanity could
be wiped out. But even if we avoid those, one day our sun will die. Check out
this story on USATODAY.com: https://usat.ly/2yhnZ39

CancelSend

#### Sent!

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

#### Posted!

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.

###### Join the Nation's Conversation

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation
Guidelines and FAQs

## Comments

This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules.
Please read the rules before joining the discussion.

# A dozen ways life on Earth could end

William Cummings, USA TODAY Published 1:40 a.m. ET Sept. 22, 2017 | Updated
1:04 p.m. ET Oct. 12, 2017

CLOSE![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/usatoday/usat-web-

static-5005.48.0/images/sprites/icon_close.png)

Many 'doomsday' predictions have surfaced over the years. Here's a look at
four of the most notable ones. USA TODAY

![AP APOCALYPSE SATURDAY A USA WA](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/239e357c2a01acade96e2310f0aa532f17dcb6fe/c=229-0-3343-2341/local/-/media/2017/09/21/USATODAY/USATODAY/636415986560194778-AP-

APOCALYPSE-SATURDAY-42224933.JPG?width=534&height=401&fit=crop)

Becky Friedman stands outside a rapture party, May 21, 2011 at Dorky's Arcade
in Tacoma, Wash.(Photo: Joshua Trujillo, AP)

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

First the bad news: The world is going to end one day and there is nothing we
can do about it. The good news: We could have a billion years to enjoy
ourselves here before that happens.

Humans have long been obsessed with "The End." Since the dawn of civilization,
people claiming to know when the big day is coming have stirred up trouble,
sparked panics and started cults. The latest apocalyptic anxiety is being
drummed up by David Meade, a self-described "specialist in research and
investigation" who predicts the Rapture as foretold in the Book of Revelations
will begin Saturday (what a bummer doomsday couldn't at least fall on a
Monday).

There is no scientific evidence to support Meade's theory that a "Planet X" he
calls "Nibiru" is headed toward Earth — but that hasn't stopped Meade from
spreading the word.

There are, however, several scenarios in which humans could be wiped out. And
even if we manage to avoid all of those, the sun will die one day.

"A lot of people have written books about all the ways that the universe can
get us," said Richard Binzel, a professor of planetary sciences at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. "Fortunately those are all very low
probability. But, the one certainty is that the sun will not last forever."

**More:**

                    
                                                * Will the world end on Saturday? 
                            * 8 times the world was supposed to end, and didn't
                            * Apocalyptic emergency alert flashes on TVs, freaks out Californians
                    

### Nuclear war

Sadly, one of the most likely ways we could be wiped is of our own making. If
the world broke out into a massive nuclear war, not only would a horrifying
number of people die in the blasts and resulting radiation, but some say it
could trigger a "nuclear winter" that could finish off the survivors.

NEWSLETTERS

Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox

We're sorry, but something went wrong

Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-872-0001.

Delivery:

Invalid email address

Thank you! You're almost signed up for

Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration.

More newsletters![](https://staticassets.gannettdigital.com/gci-static-

assets/assets/global/static-web/right-arrow@2x.png)

"If you have massive nuclear explosions, you can generate so much dust, debris
and smoke in the upper atmosphere of the Earth that sunlight could be blocked
for months if not years," Binzel said. "So, the Earth goes incredibly cold and
the long winter basically freezes out vegetation and freezes out life."

### Giant asteroid

Binzel said there is about a one-in-100-million chance of a giant asteroid
slamming into the Earth in any given year.

"It just happened to be a bad year for the dinosaurs" when they were wiped
out, Binzel said.

When a huge asteroid hits, it has an effect like nuclear winter. So much
debris is stirred up that the sun can be blocked for many years.

This is one disaster we could do something about. With our current technology,
we should spot an asteroid big enough to cause extinction "decades if not
centuries" before it arrives, Binzel said. That could give us enough time to
figure out how to divert it.

### Climate change

The potentially destructive consequences of rising global temperatures have
been the subject of heated debate and political disputes for decades.

Rising sea levels, extreme weather events and lowered food production could
lead to the death of millions, even billions of people. Some scientists fear
the impact could upend ecosytems and make the planet unihabitable. Binzel
doubts climate change would lead to our extinction, but said it could change
human civilization as know it today.

### Over-population

Renowned astrophysicist Stephen Hawking has warned that over-population is
another possible bullet that could lead to the demise of Earth as we know it.
As of April 2017, the planet's population is an estimated 7.5 billion, and the
United Nations projects it will grow to 11.2 billion by the year 2100. (By
comparison, the world's population is estimated to have been about 370 million
in the year 1350.)

At a speech in June at the Starmus science festival in Trondheim, Norway,
Hawking said mankind's only hope is to colonize other worlds.

"I am convinced that humans need to leave earth," he told the crowd at the
festival. "The Earth is becoming too small for us, our physical resources are
being drained at an alarming rate . . . When we have reached similar crisis in
our history there has usually been somewhere else to colonize. Columbus did it
in 1492 when he discovered the new world. But now there is no new world. No
Eutopia around the corner. We are running out of space."

### Black hole

If a black hole was going to swallow up the Earth we would see it coming
decades or centuries before it got here, but we wouldn't be able to do
anything about it, said David Aguilar, the author of _Cosmic Catastrophes:
Seven Ways to Destroy a Planet Like Earth._

But, Aguilar said the chances of this happening are "infinitesimally small."

### Supernova

If a nearby star exploded and went supernova, it could bombard Earth with
X-ray and gamma radiation.

Aguilar said Betelgeuse, which is part of the Orion constellation, is one star
that could go supernova, bathe the planet in radiation and "literally strip
life off the surface of the planet."

### Global pandemic

Diseases like the bubonic plague, smallpox and flu have sparked epidemics that
killed tens of millions of people, but civilization has endured.

Today, with cities more massive than ever and the world interconnected by air
travel, there are concerns that a new disease could quickly spread across the
planet.

With viruses mutating more rapidly than ever and bacteria becoming
increasingly resistant to antibiotics, public health experts believe the risk
of a global pandemic is greater than ever before.

### Biological weapons

Many countries possess biological weapons that could have horrific
consequences if unleashed.

New technology, such as the CRISPR-Cas9, makes it cheap and easy for non-state
actors to modify or weaponize viruses and bacteria as well.

"With CRISPR, and our ability to genetically change and recombine bacteria
together, we may be our own undoing," Aguilar said. "Somebody comes along who
is a rogue experiment and lets something loose on the planet and there's
virtually no stopping it."

### Aliens

Think _Independence Day._

Hawking said that if we are ever contacted by aliens, "we should be wary of
answering back."

"Meeting an advanced civilization could be like Native Americans encountering
Columbus — that didn’t turn out so well,” Hawking said.

### Robots

Hawking, entrepreneur Elon Musk and Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates have all
expressed concerns about what the rise of artificial intelligence could mean
for the human race.

Musk worries AI could start World World III and Hawking worries "the
development of full artificial intelligence could spell the end of the human
race."

"Once humans develop artificial intelligence, it will take off on its own and
redesign itself at an ever-increasing rate," Hawking told the BBC. "Humans,
who are limited by slow biological evolution, couldn't compete and would be
superseded."

### Supervolcano

Like nuclear winter or an asteroid impact, a gigantic volcanic eruption could
spew enough particles into the atmosphere that it would block out the sun,
cooling the planet and killing plant life.

"I was a member of the NASA Advisory Council on Planetary Defense which
studied ways for NASA to defend the planet from asteroids and comets," NASA
aerospace engineer Brian Wilcox told the BBC. "I came to the conclusion during
that study that the supervolcano threat is substantially greater than the
asteroid or comet threat."

NASA scientists are currently very worried about the supervolcano underneath
Yellowstone National Park and are testing ways to prevent a possible eruption.

### The sun

Even if we dodge all of the above scenarios, one day, in four or five billion
years, our sun will run out of fuel. Life on Earth will likely end long before
that though.

As the sun dies it will grow hotter and global temperatures will rise to the
point that our oceans will evaporate, Aguilar said.

"Eventually after a billion, billion-and-a-half years, the surface of this
planet is probably going to be uninhabitable," he said. Then the sun will
expand into a red giant, engulfing Mercury, Venus and possibly Earth.

Most people have a hard time accepting the inevitable end of the world.

"The idea of the end of humanity is just too horrific to entertain," said
psychoanalyst Robert Stolorow. People derive a sense of meaning from being a
part of human history either through their descendants or their contributions.
"But if human history is going to come to an end, that source of
meaningfulness will disappear."

There is always the hope we could colonize another planet. Aguilar said that
when we do look for a new home, it's important to find a planet that is just
the right age.

"Planets, like people, have a golden part of their life, and then it's all
downhill from there," he said. "We're living in the golden age of life on
Earth."

**Read more:**

Will the world end on Saturday?

World ending Saturday? Here are all the times the world was supposed to end,
and didn't

Elon Musk: Artificial intelligence battle 'most likely cause' of WWIII

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2yhnZ39

Share your feedback to help improve our site experience!

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

