

Jump to main content

An official website of the United States government.

We've made some changes to EPA.gov. If the information you are looking for is
not here, you may be able to find it on the EPA Web Archive or the January 19,
2017 Web Snapshot.

![](https://www.epa.gov/sites/all/themes/epa/logo.png)

# US EPA

United States Environmental Protection Agency

Search Search

## Main menu

                    
                                                * Environmental Topics
                              * Air
                              * Bed Bugs
                              * Chemicals and Toxics
                              * Environmental Information by Location
                              * Greener Living
                              * Health
                              * Land, Waste, and Cleanup
                              * Lead
                              * Mold
                              * Pesticides
                              * Radon
                              * Science
                              * Water
                              * A-Z Index
                            * Laws & Regulations
                              * By Business Sector
                              * By Topic
                              * Compliance
                              * Enforcement
                              * Laws and Executive Orders
                              * Policy and Guidance
                              * Regulations
                            * About EPA
                              * EPA Administrator
                              * Current Leadership
                              * Organization Chart
                              * Staff Directory
                              * Planning, Budget and Results
                              * Jobs and Internships
                              * Headquarters Offices
                              * Regional Offices
                              * Labs and Research Centers
                    

**Related Topics:**

                    
                                                * Acid Rain
                    

Contact Us

Share

                    
                                                *             *             *             * # Effects of Acid Rain
                    

On this Page:

                    
                                                * Effects of Acid Rain on Ecosystems
                            * Effects of Acid Rain on Materials
                            * Other Effects of SO2 and NOX
                              * Visibility
                              * Human Health
                    

* * *

## The Effects of Acid Rain on Ecosystems

![Graph showing level of acidity that is tolerable to various species of

aquatic

life](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2016-03/fishkillgraphic2.png)This
figure illustrates the pH level at which key organisms may be lost as their
environment becomes more acidic. Not all fish, shellfish, or the insects that
they eat can tolerate the same amount of acid.

An ecosystem is a community of plants, animals and other organisms along with
their environment including the air, water and soil. Everything in an
ecosystem is connected. If something harms one part of an ecosystem – one
species of plant or animal, the soil or the water – it can have an impact on
everything else.

### Effects of Acid Rain on Fish and Wildlife

The ecological effects of acid rain are most clearly seen in aquatic
environments, such as streams, lakes, and marshes where it can be harmful to
fish and other wildlife. As it flows through the soil, acidic rain water can
leach aluminum from soil clay particles and then flow into streams and lakes.
The more acid that is introduced to the ecosystem, the more aluminum is
released.

Some types of plants and animals are able to tolerate acidic waters and
moderate amounts of aluminum. Others, however, are acid-sensitive and will be
lost as the pH declines. Generally, the young of most species are more
sensitive to environmental conditions than adults. At pH 5, most fish eggs
cannot hatch. At lower pH levels, some adult fish die. Some acidic lakes have
no fish. Even if a species of fish or animal can tolerate moderately acidic
water, the animals or plants it eats might not. For example, frogs have a
critical pH around 4, but the mayflies they eat are more sensitive and may not
survive pH below 5.5.

### Effects of Acid Rain on Plants and Trees

Dead or dying trees are a common sight in areas effected by acid rain. Acid
rain leaches aluminum from the soil. That aluminum may be harmful to plants as
well as animals. Acid rain also removes minerals and nutrients from the soil
that trees need to grow.

At high elevations, acidic fog and clouds might strip nutrients from trees’
foliage, leaving them with brown or dead leaves and needles. The trees are
then less able to absorb sunlight, which makes them weak and less able to
withstand freezing temperatures.

### Buffering Capacity

Many forests, streams, and lakes that experience acid rain don’t suffer
effects because the soil in those areas can _**buffer**_ the acid rain by
neutralizing the acidity in the rainwater flowing through it. This capacity
depends on the thickness and composition of the soil and the type of bedrock
underneath it. In areas such as mountainous parts of the Northeast United
States, the soil is thin and lacks the ability to adequately neutralize the
acid in the rain water. As a result, these areas are particularly vulnerable
and the acid and aluminum can accumulate in the soil, streams, or lakes.

### Episodic Acidification

Melting snow and heavy rain downpours can result in what is known as episodic
acidification. Lakes that do not normally have a high level of acidity may
temporarily experience effects of acid rain when the melting snow or downpour
brings greater amounts of acidic deposition and the soil can’t buffer it. This
short duration of higher acidity (i.e., lower pH) can result in a short-term
stress on the ecosystem where a variety of organisms or species may be injured
or killed.

### Nitrogen Pollution

It’s not just the acidity of acid rain that can cause problems. Acid rain also
contains nitrogen, and this can have an impact on some ecosystems. For
example, nitrogen pollution in our coastal waters is partially responsible for
declining fish and shellfish populations in some areas. In addition to
agriculture and wastewater, much of the nitrogen produced by human activity
that reaches coastal waters comes from the atmosphere.

                    
                                                * Learn more about Nitrogen Pollution
                            * EPA's Chesapeake Bay Program Office
                    

Top of Page

* * *

## Effects of Acid Rain on Materials

Not all acidic deposition is _**wet**_. Sometimes dust particles can become
acidic as well, and this is called _**dry deposition**_. When acid rain and
dry acidic particles fall to earth, the nitric and sulfuric acid that make the
particles acidic can land on statues, buildings, and other manmade structures,
and damage their surfaces. The acidic particles corrode metal and cause paint
and stone to deteriorate more quickly. They also dirty the surfaces of
buildings and other structures such as monuments.

The consequences of this damage can be costly:

                    
                                                * damaged materials that need to be repaired or replaced,
                            * increased maintenance costs, and
                            * loss of detail on stone and metal statues, monuments and tombstones.
                    

Top of Page

* * *

## Other Effects of SO2 and NOX

### Visibility

In the atmosphere, SO2 and NOX gases can be transformed into sulfate and
nitrate particles, while some NOX can also react with other pollutants to form
ozone. These particles and ozone make the air hazy and difficult to see
through. This affects our enjoyment of national parks that we visit for the
scenic view such as Shenandoah and the Great Smoky Mountains.

                    
                                                * Learn more about Visibility and Regional Haze
                    

### Human Health

Walking in acid rain, or even swimming in a lake affected by acid rain, is no
more dangerous to humans than walking in normal rain or swimming in non-acidic
lakes. However, when the pollutants that cause acid rain —SO2 and NOX, as well
as sulfate and nitrate particles— are in the air, they can be harmful to
humans.

SO2 and NOX react in the atmosphere to form fine sulfate and nitrate particles
that people can inhale into their lungs. Many scientific studies have shown a
relationship between these particles and effects on heart function, such as
heart attacks resulting in death for people with increased heart disease risk,
and effects on lung function, such as breathing difficulties for people with
asthma.

Learn more about:

                    
                                                * Sulfur Dioxide
                            * Nitrogen Oxides
                            * Particulate Matter (PM)
                            * Asthma
                    

In addition, NOX emissions also contribute to ground level ozone, which is
also harmful to human health.

                    
                                                * Learn more about Ground Level Ozone
                    

Top of Page

Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.

Discover.

                    
                                                * Accessibility
                            * EPA Administrator
                            * Budget & Performance
                            * Contracting
                            * Grants
                            * January 19, 2017 Web Snapshot
                            * No FEAR Act Data
                            * Privacy
                            * Privacy and Security Notice
                    

Connect.

                    
                                                * Data.gov
                            * Inspector General
                            * Jobs
                            * Newsroom
                            * Open Government
                            * Regulations.gov
                            * Subscribe
                            * USA.gov
                            * White House
                    

Ask.

                    
                                                * Contact EPA
                            * Hotlines
                            * FOIA Requests
                            * Frequent Questions
                    

Follow.

                    
                                                * EPA's Facebook
                            * EPA's Twitter
                            * EPA's YouTube
                            * EPA's Flickr
                            * EPA's Instagram
                    

Last updated on June 1, 2017

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

