

  * Market Your Law Firm
  * Meet the Editors
  * Sign In

Toggle navigation Shopping-cart Toggle search __
![Nolo](//www.nolo.com/sites/all/themes/hubv6_nolo/images/logos/logo_flatwhite_nolo_Hubv6.png)

  * **Shop by Products**
  * **Find a Lawyer**
  * **Legal Articles**
    * Accidents & Injuries
    * Bankruptcy
    * Business Formation: LLCs & Corporations
    * Criminal Law
    * Debt Management
    * Disability Law
    * Divorce & Family Law
    * DUI / DWI & Traffic Tickets
    * Employment Law
    * Foreclosure
    * Immigration
    * Landlords
    * LGBT Law
    * Nonprofits
    * Patent, Copyright & Trademark
    * Personal Finance
    * Real Estate
    * Small Business
    * Small Claims Court & Lawsuits
    * Social Security & Retirement
    * Tenants
    * Taxes
    * Wills, Trusts & Probate
    * Workers' Compensation

__ Toggle search Shopping-cart

Search Type All Products Lawyers Articles

Search Term

Location

Search **SEARCH**

  1. Home
  2. Legal Topics
  3. Nonprofits
  4. Maintaining Your Nonprofit's Tax-Exempt Status

# Are Churches Always Exempt?

## Under American tax law, churches are exempt from having to pay federal,

state, and local taxes.

By Stephen Fishman, J.D.

![](https://www.nolo.com/sites/default/files/LLCBanner_Icons_2_0.png)
![](https://www.nolo.com/sites/default/files/LLCBanner_Mobile_0_0_0.png)

Are churches exempt from having to pay taxes? The short answer is "yes."

For purposes of U.S. tax law, churches are considered to be public charities,
also known as Section 501(c)(3) organizations. As such, they are generally
exempt from federal, state, and local income and property taxes. "Exempt"
means they don't have to pay these taxes. This is so even though they may earn
substantial amounts of money.

Why are churches classified as charities? Because, under American tax law,
charitable activity includes the advancement of religion. Atheists may not
like it, but it has always been this way.

## What Is a Church?

Not just anybody can call themselves a church and enjoy a tax exemption. An
organization must be an authentic church to qualify. For tax purposes, a
church is a place of worship including Christian churches, temples, mosques,
synagogues, and other worship places. Churches also include conventions and
associations of churches--for example, the United Methodist Church or the
Southern Baptist Convention. "Integrated auxiliaries" of churches--seminaries,
for example-- also qualify.

Usually, it's pretty obvious whether an organization qualifies as a church.
However, where questions arise, the IRS looks at the following factors to
determine whether an organization is a church for tax purposes. These include
whether it has:

  * a distinct legal existence
  * a recognized creed and form of worship
  * a definite and distinct ecclesiastical government
  * a formal code of doctrine and discipline
  * a distinct religious history
  * a membership not associated with any other church or denomination
  * ordained ministers ministering to its congregations
  * ordained ministers selected after completing prescribed studies
  * a literature of its own
  * established places of worship
  * regular congregations
  * regular religious services
  * Sunday schools for religious instruction of the young, and
  * schools for the preparation of its ministers.

No single factor determines the answer, and not all factors must be present.
This is something the IRS decides on a case by case basis.

## Limited IRS Oversight of Churches

Because of the First Amendment to the Constitution guaranteeing freedom of
religion, the IRS has long adopted a largely hands-off approach to regulating
churches.

For example as long as an organization qualifies as a church, it need not
apply to the IRS to receive its tax exemption--the exemption is automatic.
Moreover, churches need not file the dreaded IRS Form 990 or 990-EZ--the
annual information forms that other charities must file each year.

However, many churches apply to the IRS anyway. The advantages of doing so are
that (1) the organization will obtain official recognition of its tax-exempt
status which assures donors that their contributions are tax deductible, and
(2) it will be listed in IRS records as a qualified charitable organization
and it can obtain a determination letter from the IRS stating that
contributions to it are tax deductible.

## Churches that Make Money

Churches may be all about the next world, but they need money to operate in
this world. Churches (and other nonprofits) never have to pay tax on their
unearned income--namely, donations, gifts, grants, and investment income.
However, a church that regularly engages in a business activity that is
unrelated to its religious mission may have to pay a special tax on the
profits it earns. This is called the unrelated business income tax (UBIT for
short). However, income churches earn from bingo games, thrift shops,
volunteer work, donor lists, low cost giveaways, and advertising is not
subject to UBIT.

One case where a church was subject to UBIT was where it regularly hired out
its members to plant seedlings on forest land owned by private landowners and
pocketed the money earned. If a church earns $1,000 or more in gross receipts
from an unrelated trade or business during the year, it must file IRS Form
990-T, _Exempt Organization Business Income Tax Return._

_August 2013  
_

### Talk to a Lawyer

#### Need help? Start here.

Practice Area Please select...Airplane Business TransactionsAsbestosAsylumAuto
AccidentAuto Accident (Spanish)AviationAviation
AccidentsBankruptcyBusinessChild CustodyChild SupportCivil RightsCollaborative
DivorceCommercial Real EstateConsumer ProtectionCriminal DefenseDUI and
DWIDebt SettlementDeportationDivorceDivorce
MediationEmploymentEnvironmentEstate PlanningExpungementFamilyForeclosureGreen
CardHernia MeshImmigration LawIntellectual PropertyLandlord and TenantLegal
MalpracticeLitigationLong Term DisabilityMaritimeMedical MalpracticeMilitary
DivorceNursing Home or Elder AbuseOvertime PayPatentsPersonal
InjuryProbateProduct LiabilityReal EstateSSDISecuritiesSex CrimesSexual
HarassmentTaxTraffic TicketsTrucking AccidentUS CitizenshipUS
VisaUnemploymentVeterans DisabilityWorkers CompensationWrongful DeathWrongful
Termination

Zip Code

SEARCH

#### How it Works

  1. Briefly tell us about your case
  2. Provide your contact information
  3. Choose attorneys to contact you

### Legal Information & Products from Nolo

Business Formation Choosing a Business Structure LLCs Partnerships Sole
Proprietorships Forming a Corporation

Popular Products from Nolo ![Form an

LLC](/themes/hubv6_nolo/images/placeholders/product_placeholder_200.png)

Form an LLC

![LLC or

Corporation?](/themes/hubv6_nolo/images/placeholders/product_placeholder_200.png)

LLC or Corporation?

![Guide to Single-Member

LLCs](/themes/hubv6_nolo/images/placeholders/product_placeholder_200.png)

Guide to Single-Member LLCs

### Related Products

MORE

![Form Your Own Limited Liability

Company](/themes/hubv6_nolo/images/placeholders/product_placeholder_200.png)

Form Your Own Limited Liability Company

![Nolo's Guide to Single-Member

LLCs](/themes/hubv6_nolo/images/placeholders/product_placeholder_200.png)

Nolo's Guide to Single-Member LLCs

![Online California

Corporation](/themes/hubv6_nolo/images/placeholders/product_placeholder_200.png)

Online California Corporation

![Online Florida

Corporation](/themes/hubv6_nolo/images/placeholders/product_placeholder_200.png)

Online Florida Corporation

### Related Ads

NEED PROFESSIONAL HELP ?

## Talk to a Business Law attorney.

Zip Code

Start

#### How It Works

  1. Briefly tell us about your case
  2. Provide your contact information
  3. Choose attorneys to contact you

![Nolo](//www.nolo.com/sites/default/files/LOGO_noText_Print.jpg)

Company Information

#### Company

Information

  * About Nolo
  * Careers
  * Press Room
  * Blog
  * Contact Us
  * Customer Service
  * Tech Support

Products & Services

#### Products

& Services

  * Books & Software
  * New Arrivals & Coupons
  * Bestsellers
  * Articles
  * Redeem a Product

Lawyer Directory

#### Lawyer

Directory

  * Market Your Law Firm
  * Find a Lawyer
  * Lawyers by Location
  * Tips on Hiring Lawyers

Free Legal Information

#### Free Legal

Information

  * Articles & FAQs
  * Legal Updates
  * Calculators
  * Law Blogs
  * Legal Research
  * Newest Articles
  * Legal Dictionary

Sales

#### Sales

  * Affiliates
  * Library
  * Trade

Copyright (C) **2019 MH Sub I, LLC dba Nolo** Â® Self-help services may not be
permitted in all states. The information provided on this site is not legal
advice, does not constitute a lawyer referral service, and no attorney-client
or confidential relationship is or will be formed by use of the site. The
attorney listings on this site are paid attorney advertising. In some states,
the information on this website may be considered a lawyer referral service.
Please reference the Terms of Use and the Supplemental Terms for specific
information related to your state. Your use of this website constitutes
acceptance of the Terms of Use, Supplemental Terms, Privacy Policy and Cookie
Policy.

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=8138560&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=344858165663318&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template

