

Skip to main content

SubscribeMenu

Scientific American

                    
                                                * Cart 0
                            * Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?Login![Loading](/public/resources/loader-eba9d808f62929c2c4c744e562eca7d9.gif)Not yet registered?
                            * |Stay Informed
                    

SearchSubscribe

Close

SearchClose

Advanced Search

                    
                                                * The Sciences
                            * Mind
                            * Health
                            * Tech
                            * Sustainability
                            * Education
                            * Video
                            * Podcasts
                            * Blogs
                            * Publications
                            * Subscribe
                            * Current Issue
                            * Cart0
                            * Sign In
                            * Stay Informed
                    
                            * Share
                            * Latest
                    
                            *             *             *             * Clean Air Policy
                    

# Ice Core Data Help Solve a Global Warming Mystery

Why do some ice core samples seem to indicate CO2 spikes trailed increases in
global temperature? It’s all about the way bubbles move in ice

                    
                                                * By William Ferguson on March 1, 2013
                    
                            * Share on Facebook
                    
                            * Share on Twitter
                    
                            * Share on Reddit
                    
                            * Share on LinkedIn
                    
                            * Share via
                    
                            * Print
                    

Advertisement

Scientists can study Earth's climate as far back as 800,000 years by drilling
core samples from deep underneath the ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica.
Detailed information on air temperature and CO2 levels is trapped in these
specimens. Current polar records show an intimate connection between
atmospheric carbon dioxide and temperature in the natural world. In essence,
when one goes up, the other one follows.

There is, however, still a degree of uncertainty about which came first--a
spike in temperature or CO2. Until now, the most comprehensive records to date
on a major change in Earth's climate came from the EPICA Dome C ice core on
the Antarctic Plateau. The data, covering the end of the last ice age, between
20,000 and 10,000 years ago, show that CO2 levels could have lagged behind
rising global temperatures by as much as 1,400 years. "The idea that there was
a lag of CO2 behind temperature is something climate change skeptics pick on,"
says Edward Brook of Oregon State University's College of Earth, Ocean and
Atmospheric Sciences. "They say, 'How could CO2 levels affect global
temperature when you are telling me the temperature changed first?'"

Frederic Parrenin of the Laboratory of Glaciology and Geophysical Environment
in France and a team of researchers may have found an answer to the question.
His team compiled an extensive record of Antarctic temperatures and CO2 data
from existing data and five ice cores drilled in the Antarctic interior over
the last 30 years. Their results, published February 28 in _Science_ _,_ show
CO2 lagged temperature by less than 200 years, drastically decreasing the
amount of uncertainty in previous estimates.

The wide margin of error in the EPICA core data is due to the way air gets
trapped in layers of ice. Snowpack becomes progressively denser from the
surface down to around 100 meters, where it forms solid ice. Scientists use
air trapped in the ice to determine the CO2 levels of past climates, whereas
they use the ice itself to determine temperature. But because air diffuses
rapidly through the ice pack, those air bubbles are younger than the ice
surrounding them. This means that in places with little snowfall --like the
Dome C ice core--the age difference between gas and ice can be thousands of
years.

Parrenin's team addresses these concerns with a new method that establishes
the different ages of the gas and ice. They measured the concentration of an
isotope, nitrogen 15, which is greater the deeper the snowpack is. Once they
were able to determine snowpack depth from the nitrogen 15 data, a simple
model can determine the offset in depth between gas and ice and the amount of
time the difference represents. The researchers then compared results from
multiple locations to reduce the margin of error.

"Our method takes into account more data and shows that the age difference in
Antarctic temperature and CO2 levels is less than we previously thought,"
Parrenin says. "I think this could help to change the tone of discussions
about climate change."

![](/themes/responsive/images/global/rightsPermsIcon.png) Rights & Permissions

### ABOUT THE AUTHOR(S)

#### William Ferguson

#### Recent Articles

                    
                                                * Decades-Old Documents Could Speed Discovery of Geothermal Wells
                            * A Promising Technique May Bring Less Invasive Cancer Diagnoses
                            * New Geothermal Data System Could Open Up Clean-Energy Reserves
                    

## Latest News

![My Next

Chapter](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/E9904C4D-5310-46DA-A478C2678A202DF1_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Policy & Ethics

### My Next Chapter

7 hours ago — Mariette DiChristina

![High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural

Network](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6C243A30-A89D-458F-9FCC9C4A2C2A3537_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Computing

### High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural Network

8 hours ago — Christopher Intagliata

![Remembering Murray Gell-

Mann](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/23C98019-3DE6-4337-89F367C2E14D7C37_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Physics

### Remembering Murray Gell-Mann

8 hours ago — Stephen Wolfram

![Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S.

Deaths](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6823A5DF-023E-4E2A-95CF29B7EAB8F0EE_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Climate

### Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S. Deaths

8 hours ago — Chelsea Harvey and E&E News

![Rethinking National

Security](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/95DCFB0C-3E0B-46BC-

BACD9D67250A2DF4_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Policy & Ethics

### Rethinking National Security

10 hours ago — Martin E. Hellman

![Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or

Hype?](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/E84422C7-6D55-4610-B755A0DB315E0C52_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Wellness

### Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or Hype?

11 hours ago — Nutrition Diva Monica Reinagel

Advertisement

## Newsletter

## Get smart. Sign up for our email newsletter.

Sign Up

## Expertise. Insights. Illumination.

Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845,
including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.

Subscribe Now!![Expertise. Insights.

Illumination.](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/D5AF5187-56F7-4844-9937BFECE4B78D53_source.png?w=385&h=375)

Follow us

                    
                                                * instagram
                            * soundcloud
                            * youtube
                            * twitter
                            * facebook
                            * rss
                    

Scientific american arabic

العربية

                    
                                                * Store
                            * About
                            * Press Room
                    
                            * FAQs
                            * Contact Us
                            * Site Map
                    
                            * Advertise
                            * SA Custom Media
                            * Terms of Use
                    
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Use of Cookies
                            * International Editions
                    

Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial
relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found
at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy
of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.

(C) 2019 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc.

All Rights Reserved.

Scroll To Top

### Scientific American Health & Medicine

![Scientific American Health &

Medicine](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/E5FD5DC7-84AE-4FC2-8AE4A295DDB604B4_source.png)

Subscribe Today

![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-403331h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

**You have free article s left.**

* * *

![Temp Paywall

Img](/public/resources/paywall_temp_img-098a5039687a6951d2abc22803855180.jpg)

Support our award-winning coverage of advances in science & technology.

See subscription options

Already a subscriber? Sign in.

You have no free articles left.

Subscribers get more award-winning coverage of advances in science &
technology.

Sign In

See Subscription Options

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

