

![This is a featured article. Click here for more

information.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/e/e7/Cscr-

featured.svg/20px-Cscr-featured.svg.png)

# Ice core

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Cylindrical sample drilled from an ice sheet

![An ice core being slid out of a drill barrel

sideways](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9c/Icecore_4.jpg/220px-

Icecore_4.jpg)

Ice core sample taken from drill. Photo by Lonnie Thompson, Byrd Polar
Research Center

An **ice core** is a core sample that is typically removed from an ice sheet
or a high mountain glacier. Since the ice forms from the incremental buildup
of annual layers of snow, lower layers are older than upper, and an ice core
contains ice formed over a range of years. Cores are drilled with hand augers
(for shallow holes) or powered drills; they can reach depths of over two miles
(3.2 km), and contain ice up to 800,000 years old.

The physical properties of the ice and of material trapped in it can be used
to reconstruct the climate over the age range of the core. The proportions of
different oxygen and hydrogen isotopes provide information about ancient
temperatures, and the air trapped in tiny bubbles can be analysed to determine
the level of atmospheric gases such as carbon dioxide. Since heat flow in a
large ice sheet is very slow, the borehole temperature is another indicator of
temperature in the past. These data can be combined to find the climate model
that best fits all the available data.

Impurities in ice cores may depend on location. Coastal areas are more likely
to include material of marine origin, such as sea salt ions. Greenland ice
cores contain layers of wind-blown dust that correlate with cold, dry periods
in the past, when cold deserts were scoured by wind. Radioactive elements,
either of natural origin or created by nuclear testing, can be used to date
the layers of ice. Some volcanic events that were sufficiently powerful to
send material around the globe have left a signature in many different cores
that can be used to synchronise their time scales.

Ice cores have been studied since the early 20th century, and several cores
were drilled as a result of the International Geophysical Year (1957–1958).
Depths of over 400 m were reached, a record which was extended in the 1960s to
2164 m at Byrd Station in Antarctica. Soviet ice drilling projects in
Antarctica include decades of work at Vostok Station, with the deepest core
reaching 3769 m. Numerous other deep cores in the Antarctic have been
completed over the years, including the West Antarctic Ice Sheet project, and
cores managed by the British Antarctic Survey and the International Trans-
Antarctic Scientific Expedition. In Greenland, a sequence of collaborative
projects began in the 1970s with the Greenland Ice Sheet Project; there have
been multiple follow-up projects, with the most recent, the East Greenland
Ice-Core Project, expected to complete a deep core in east Greenland in 2020.

## Contents

                    
                                                * 1 Structure of ice sheets and cores
                            * 2 Coring
                              * 2.1 Large coring projects
                            * 3 Core processing
                              * 3.1 Brittle ice
                            * 4 Ice core data
                              * 4.1 Dating
                              * 4.2 Visual analysis
                              * 4.3 Isotopic analysis
                              * 4.4 Palaeoatmospheric sampling
                              * 4.5 Glaciochemistry
                              * 4.6 Radionuclides
                              * 4.7 Other inclusions
                              * 4.8 Physical properties
                            * 5 History
                              * 5.1 Early years
                              * 5.2 Antarctica deep cores
                              * 5.3 Greenland deep cores
                              * 5.4 Non-polar cores
                            * 6 Future plans
                            * 7 See also
                            * 8 References
                            * 9 Sources
                            * 10 External links
                    

## Structure of ice sheets and cores[edit]

See also: Ice-sheet dynamics

![A scientist in a pit of

snow](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e9/Taku_glacier_firn_ice_sampling.png/220px-

Taku_glacier_firn_ice_sampling.png)

Sampling the surface of Taku Glacier in Alaska. There is increasingly dense
firn between surface snow and blue glacier ice.

An ice core is a vertical column through a glacier, sampling the layers that
formed through an annual cycle of snowfall and melt.[1] As snow accumulates,
each layer presses on lower layers, making them denser until they turn into
firn. Firn is not dense enough to prevent air from escaping; but at a density
of about 830 kg/m3 it turns to ice, and the air within is sealed into bubbles
that capture the composition of the atmosphere at the time the ice formed.[2]
The depth at which this occurs varies with location, but in Greenland and the
Antarctic it ranges from 64 m to 115 m.[3] Because the rate of snowfall varies
from site to site, the age of the firn when it turns to ice varies a great
deal. At Summit Camp in Greenland, the depth is 77 m and the ice is 230 years
old; at Dome C in Antarctica the depth is 95 m and the age 2500 years.[4] As
further layers build up, the pressure increases, and at about 1500 m the
crystal structure of the ice changes from hexagonal to cubic, allowing air
molecules to move into the cubic crystals and form a clathrate. The bubbles
disappear and the ice becomes more transparent.[2]

Two or three feet of snow may turn into less than a foot of ice.[2] The weight
above makes deeper layers of ice thin and flow outwards. Ice is lost at the
edges of the glacier to icebergs, or to summer melting, and the overall shape
of the glacier does not change much with time.[5] The outward flow can distort
the layers, so it is desirable to drill deep ice cores at places where there
is very little flow. These can be located using maps of the flow lines.[6]

Impurities in the ice provide information on the environment from when they
were deposited. These include soot, ash, and other types of particle from
forest fires and volcanoes; isotopes such as beryllium-10 created by cosmic
rays; micrometeorites; and pollen.[1] The lowest layer of a glacier, called
basal ice, is frequently formed of subglacial meltwater that has refrozen. It
can be up to about 20 m thick, and though it has scientific value (for
example, it may contain subglacial microbial populations),[7] it often does
not retain stratigraphic information.[8]

Cores are often drilled in areas such as Antarctica and central Greenland
where the temperature is almost never warm enough to cause melting, but the
summer sun can still alter the snow. In polar areas, the sun is visible day
and night during the local summer and invisible all winter. It can make some
snow sublimate, leaving the top inch or so less dense. When the sun approaches
its lowest point in the sky, the temperature drops and hoar frost forms on the
top layer. Buried under the snow of following years, the coarse-grained hoar
frost compresses into lighter layers than the winter snow. As a result,
alternating bands of lighter and darker ice can be seen in an ice core.[9]

## Coring[edit]

See also: Ice drilling

![Drawing of a cylinder with two helical flanges around it and cutting teeth

at the

bottom](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/af/Brooks_ice_auger_patent_drawings_1932-retouched.png/220px-

Brooks_ice_auger_patent_drawings_1932-retouched.png)

Ice auger patented in 1932; the design is very similar to modern augers used
for shallow drilling.[10]

Ice cores are collected by cutting around a cylinder of ice in a way that
enables it to be brought to the surface. Early cores were often collected with
hand augers and they are still used for short holes. A design for ice core
augers was patented in 1932 and they have changed little since. An auger is
essentially a cylinder with helical metal ribs (known as flights) wrapped
around the outside, at the lower end of which are cutting blades. Hand augers
can be rotated by a T handle or a brace handle, and some can be attached to
handheld electric drills to power the rotation. With the aid of a tripod for
lowering and raising the auger, cores up to 50 m deep can be retrieved, but
the practical limit is about 30 m for engine-powered augers, and less for hand
augers. Below this depth, electromechanical or thermal drills are used.[10]

The cutting apparatus of a drill is on the bottom end of a drill barrel, the
tube that surrounds the core as the drill cuts downward. The cuttings (chips
of ice cut away by the drill) must be drawn up the hole and disposed of or
they will reduce the cutting efficiency of the drill.[11] They can be removed
by compacting them into the walls of the hole or into the core, by air
circulation (dry drilling),[11][12] or by the use of a drilling fluid (wet
drilling).[13] Dry drilling is limited to about 400 m depth, since below that
point a hole would close up as the ice deforms from the weight of the ice
above.[14]

Drilling fluids are chosen to balance the pressure so that the hole remains
stable.[12] The fluid must have a low kinematic viscosity to reduce tripping
time (the time taken to pull the drilling equipment out of the hole and return
it to the bottom of the hole). Since retrieval of each segment of core
requires tripping, a slower speed of travel through the drilling fluid could
add significant time to a project—a year or more for a deep hole. The fluid
must contaminate the ice as little as possible; it must have low toxicity, for
safety and to minimize the effect on the environment; it must be available at
a reasonable cost; and it must be relatively easy to transport.[15]
Historically, there have been three main types of ice drilling fluids: two-
component fluids based on kerosene-like products mixed with fluorocarbons to
increase density; alcohol compounds, including aqueous ethylene glycol and
ethanol solutions; and esters, including n-butyl acetate. Newer fluids have
been proposed, including new ester-based fluids, low-molecular weight dimethyl
siloxane oils, fatty-acid esters, and kerosene-based fluids mixed with foam-
expansion agents.[16]

Rotary drilling is the main method of drilling for minerals and it has also
been used for ice drilling. It uses a string of drill pipe rotated from the
top, and drilling fluid is pumped down through the pipe and back up around it.
The cuttings are removed from the fluid at the top of the hole and the fluid
is then pumped back down.[13] This approach requires long trip times, since
the entire drill string must be hoisted out of the hole, and each length of
pipe must be separately disconnected, and then reconnected when the drill
string is reinserted.[11][17] Along with the logistical difficulties
associated with bringing heavy equipment to ice sheets, this makes traditional
rotary drills unattractive.[11] In contrast, wireline drills allow the removal
of the core barrel from the drill assembly while it is still at the bottom of
the borehole. The core barrel is hoisted to the surface, and the core removed;
the barrel is lowered again and reconnected to the drill assembly.[18] Another
alternative is flexible drill-stem rigs, in which the drill string is flexible
enough to be coiled when at the surface. This eliminates the need to
disconnect and reconnect the pipes during a trip.[17]

![The bottom of an ice

drill](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/Drilling_mechanical-

drill-head.jpg/220px-Drilling_mechanical-drill-head.jpg)

Mechanical drill head, showing cutting teeth

The need for a string of drillpipe that extends from the surface to the bottom
of the borehole can be eliminated by suspending the entire downhole assembly
on an armoured cable that conveys power to the downhole motor. These cable-
suspended drills can be used for both shallow and deep holes; they require an
anti-torque device, such as leaf-springs that press against the borehole, to
prevent the drill assembly rotating around the drillhead as it cuts the
core.[19] The drilling fluid is usually circulated down around the outside of
the drill and back up between the core and core barrel; the cuttings are
stored in the downhole assembly, in a chamber above the core. When the core is
retrieved, the cuttings chamber is emptied for the next run. Some drills have
been designed to retrieve a second annular core outside the central core, and
in these drills the space between the two cores can be used for circulation.
Cable-suspended drills have proved to be the most reliable design for deep ice
drilling.[20][21]

Thermal drills, which cut ice by electrically heating the drill head, can also
be used, but they have some disadvantages. Some have been designed for working
in cold ice; they have high power consumption and the heat they produce can
degrade the quality of the retrieved ice core. Early thermal drills, designed
for use without drilling fluid, were limited in depth as a result; later
versions were modified to work in fluid-filled holes but this slowed down trip
times, and these drills retained the problems of the earlier models. In
addition, thermal drills are typically bulky and can be impractical to use in
areas where there are logistical difficulties. More recent modifications
include the use of antifreeze, which eliminates the need for heating the drill
assembly and hence reduces the power needs of the drill.[22] Hot-water drills
use jets of hot water at the drill head to melt the water around the core. The
drawbacks are that it is difficult to accurately control the dimensions of the
borehole, the core cannot easily be kept sterile, and the heat may cause
thermal shock to the core.[23]

When drilling in temperate ice, thermal drills have an advantage over
electromechanical (EM) drills: ice melted by pressure can refreeze on EM drill
bits, reducing cutting efficiency, and can clog other parts of the mechanism.
EM drills are also more likely to fracture ice cores where the ice is under
high stress.[24]

When drilling deep holes, which require drilling fluid, the hole must be cased
(fitted with a cylindrical lining), since otherwise the drilling fluid will be
absorbed by the snow and firn. The casing has to reach down to the impermeable
ice layers. To install casing a shallow auger can be used to create a pilot
hole, which is then reamed (expanded) until it is wide enough to accept the
casing; a large diameter auger can also be used, avoiding the need for
reaming. An alternative to casing is to use water in the borehole to saturate
the porous snow and firn; the water eventually turns to ice.[3]

Ice cores from different depths are not all equally in demand by scientific
investigators, which can lead to a shortage of ice cores at certain depths. To
address this, work has been done on technology to drill replicate cores:
additional cores, retrieved by drilling into the sidewall of the borehole, at
depths of particular interest. Replicate cores were successfully retrieved at
WAIS divide in the 2012–2013 drilling season, at four different depths.[25]

### Large coring projects[edit]

The logistics of any coring project are complex because the locations are
usually difficult to reach, and may be at high altitude. The largest projects
require years of planning and years to execute, and are usually run as
international consortiums. The EastGRIP project, for example, which as of 2017
is drilling in eastern Greenland, is run by the Centre for Ice and Climate, in
Denmark,[26] and includes representatives from 12 countries on its steering
committee.[27] Over the course of a drilling season, scores of people work at
the camp,[28] and logistics support includes airlift capabilities provided by
the US Air National Guard, using Hercules transport planes owned by the
National Science Foundation.[29] In 2015 the EastGRIP team moved the camp
facilities from NEEM, a previous Greenland ice core drilling site, to the
EastGRIP site.[30] Drilling is expected to continue until at least 2020.[31]

## Core processing[edit]

![Scientist standing at a bench, sawing an ice

core](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/29/Gripsaw.jpg/220px-

Gripsaw.jpg)

Sawing the GRIP core

With some variation between projects, the following steps must occur between
drilling and final storage of the ice core.[32]

The drill removes an annulus of ice around the core but does not cut under it.
A spring-loaded lever arm called a core dog can break off the core and hold it
in place while it is brought to the surface. The core is then extracted from
the drill barrel, usually by laying it out flat so that the core can slide out
onto a prepared surface.[32] The core must be cleaned of drilling fluid as it
is slid out; for the WAIS Divide coring project, a vacuuming system was set up
to facilitate this. The surface that receives the core should be aligned as
accurately as possible with the drill barrel to minimise mechanical stress on
the core, which can easily break. The ambient temperature is kept well below
freezing to avoid thermal shock.[33]

A log is kept with information about the core, including its length and the
depth it was retrieved from, and the core may be marked to show its
orientation. It is usually cut into shorter sections, the standard length in
the US being one metre. The cores are then stored on site, usually in a space
below snow level to simplify temperature maintenance, though additional
refrigeration can be used. If more drilling fluid must be removed, air may be
blown over the cores. Any samples needed for preliminary analysis are taken.
The core is then bagged, often in polythene, and stored for shipment.
Additional packing, including padding material, is added. When the cores are
flown from the drilling site, the aircraft's flight deck is unheated to help
maintain a low temperature; when they are transported by ship they must be
kept in a refrigeration unit.[33]

There are several locations around the world that store ice cores, such as the
National Ice Core Laboratory in the US. These locations make samples available
for testing. A substantial fraction of each core is archived for future
analyses.[33][34]

### Brittle ice[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/22/CSIRO_ScienceImage_518_Air_Bubbles_Trapped_in_Ice.jpg/150px-

CSIRO_ScienceImage_518_Air_Bubbles_Trapped_in_Ice.jpg)

Bubbles in an Antarctic ice sample Illuminated with polarised light

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d0/CSIRO_ScienceImage_521_Bubbles_in_Ice.jpg/150px-

CSIRO_ScienceImage_521_Bubbles_in_Ice.jpg)

Sliver of Antarctic ice showing trapped bubbles. Images from CSIRO.

Over a depth range known as the brittle ice zone, bubbles of air are trapped
in the ice under great pressure. When the core is brought to the surface, the
bubbles can exert a stress that exceeds the tensile strength of the ice,
resulting in cracks and spall.[35] At greater depths, the air disappears into
clathrates and the ice becomes stable again.[35][36] At the WAIS Divide site,
the brittle ice zone was from 520 m to 1340 m depth.[35]

The brittle ice zone typically returns poorer quality samples than for the
rest of the core. Some steps can be taken to alleviate the problem. Liners can
be placed inside the drill barrel to enclose the core before it is brought to
the surface, but this makes it difficult to clean off the drilling fluid. In
mineral drilling, special machinery can bring core samples to the surface at
bottom-hole pressure, but this is too expensive for the inaccessible locations
of most drilling sites. Keeping the processing facilities at very low
temperatures limits thermal shocks. Cores are most brittle at the surface, so
another approach is to break them into 1 m lengths in the hole. Extruding the
core from the drill barrel into a net helps keep it together if it shatters.
Brittle cores are also often allowed to rest in storage at the drill site for
some time, up to a full year between drilling seasons, to let the ice
gradually relax.[35][37]

## Ice core data[edit]

### Dating[edit]

![Three graphs laid out one above the other; the CO2 and temperature can be

visually seen to be correlated; the dust graph is inversely correlated with

the other

two](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b8/Vostok_Petit_data.svg/300px-

Vostok_Petit_data.svg.png)

Graph of CO2 (green), reconstructed temperature (blue) and dust (red) from the
Vostok ice core for the past 420,000 years

Many different kinds of analysis are performed on ice cores, including visual
layer counting, tests for electrical conductivity and physical properties, and
assays for inclusion of gases, particles, radionuclides, and various molecular
species. For the results of these tests to be useful in the reconstruction of
palaeoenvironments, there has to be a way to determine the relationship
between depth and age of the ice. The simplest approach is to count layers of
ice that correspond to the original annual layers of snow, but this is not
always possible. An alternative is to model the ice accumulation and flow to
predict how long it takes a given snowfall to reach a particular depth.
Another method is to correlate radionuclides or trace atmospheric gases with
other timescales such as periodicities in the earth's orbital parameters.[38]

A difficulty in ice core dating is that gases can diffuse through firn, so the
ice at a given depth may be substantially older than the gases trapped in it.
As a result, there are two chronologies for a given ice core: one for the ice,
and one for the trapped gases. To determine the relationship between the two,
models have been developed for the depth at which gases are trapped for a
given location, but their predictions have not always proved reliable.[39][40]
At locations with very low snowfall, such as Vostok, the uncertainty in the
difference between ages of ice and gas can be over 1,000 years.[41]

The density and size of the bubbles trapped in ice provide an indication of
crystal size at the time they formed. The size of a crystal is related to its
growth rate, which in turn depends on the temperature, so the properties of
the bubbles can be combined with information on accumulation rates and firn
density to calculate the temperature when the firn formed.[42]

Radiocarbon dating can be used on the carbon in trapped CO  
2. In the polar ice sheets there is about 15–20 µg of carbon in the form of CO  
2 in each kilogram of ice, and there may also be carbonate particles from
wind-blown dust (loess). The CO  
2 can be isolated by subliming the ice in a vacuum, keeping the temperature
low enough to avoid the loess giving up any carbon. The results have to be
corrected for the presence of 14  
C produced directly in the ice by cosmic rays, and the amount of correction
depends strongly on the location of the ice core. Corrections for 14  
C produced by nuclear testing have much less impact on the results.[43] Carbon
in particulates can also be dated by separating and testing the water-
insoluble organic components of dust. The very small quantities typically
found require at least 300 g of ice to be used, limiting the ability of the
technique to precisely assign an age to core depths.[44]

Timescales for ice cores from the same hemisphere can usually be synchronised
using layers that include material from volcanic events. It is more difficult
to connect the timescales in different hemispheres. The Laschamp event, a
geomagnetic reversal about 40,000 years ago, can be identified in
cores;[45][46] away from that point, measurements of gases such as CH  
4 (methane) can be used to connect the chronology of a Greenland core (for
example) with an Antarctic core.[47][48] In cases where volcanic tephra is
interspersed with ice, it can be dated using argon/argon dating and hence
provide fixed points for dating the ice.[49][50] Uranium decay has also been
used to date ice cores.[49][51] Another approach is to use Bayesian
probability techniques to find the optimal combination of multiple independent
records. This approach was developed in 2010 and has since been turned into a
software tool, DatIce.[52][53]

The boundary between the Pleistocene and the Holocene, about 11,700 years ago,
is now formally defined with reference to data on Greenland ice cores. Formal
definitions of stratigraphic boundaries allow scientists in different
locations to correlate their findings. These often involve fossil records,
which are not present in ice cores, but cores have extremely precise
palaeoclimatic information that can be correlated with other climate
proxies.[54]

The dating of ice sheets has proved to be a key element in providing dates for
palaeoclimatic records. According to Richard Alley, "In many ways, ice cores
are the ‘rosetta stones’ that allow development of a global network of
accurately dated paleoclimatic records using the best ages determined anywhere
on the planet".[42]

### Visual analysis[edit]

![A series of dark and light bands, with arrows identifying the lighter

bands](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/31/GISP2_1855m_ice_core_layers.png/220px-

GISP2_1855m_ice_core_layers.png)

19 cm long section of GISP 2 ice core from 1855 m showing annual layer
structure illuminated from below by a fibre optic source. Section contains 11
annual layers with summer layers (arrowed) sandwiched between darker winter
layers.[55]

Cores show visible layers, which correspond to annual snowfall at the core
site. If a pair of pits is dug in fresh snow with a thin wall between them and
one of the pits is roofed over, an observer in the roofed pit will see the
layers revealed by sunlight shining through. A six-foot pit may show anything
from less than a year of snow to several years of snow, depending on the
location. Poles left in the snow from year to year show the amount of
accumulated snow each year, and this can be used to verify that the visible
layer in a snow pit corresponds to a single year's snowfall.[56]

In central Greenland a typical year might produce two or three feet of winter
snow, plus a few inches of summer snow. When this turns to ice, the two layers
will make up no more than a foot of ice. The layers corresponding to the
summer snow will contain bigger bubbles than the winter layers, so the
alternating layers remain visible, which makes it possible to count down a
core and determine the age of each layer.[57] As the depth increases to the
point where the ice structure changes to a clathrate, the bubbles are no
longer visible, and the layers can no longer be seen. Dust layers may now
become visible. Ice from Greenland cores contains dust carried by wind; the
dust appears most strongly in late winter, and appears as cloudy grey layers.
These layers are stronger and easier to see at times in the past when the
earth's climate was cold, dry, and windy.[58]

Any method of counting layers eventually runs into difficulties as the flow of
the ice causes the layers to become thinner and harder to see with increasing
depth.[59] The problem is more acute at locations where accumulation is high;
low accumulation sites, such as central Antarctica, must be dated by other
methods.[60] For example, at Vostok, layer counting is only possible down to
an age of 55,000 years.[61]

When there is summer melting, the melted snow refreezes lower in the snow and
firn, and the resulting layer of ice has very few bubbles so is easy to
recognise in a visual examination of a core. Identification of these layers,
both visually and by measuring density of the core against depth, allows the
calculation of a melt-feature percentage (MF): an MF of 100% would mean that
every year's deposit of snow showed evidence of melting. MF calculations are
averaged over multiple sites or long time periods in order to smooth the data.
Plots of MF data over time reveal variations in the climate, and have shown
that since the late 20th century melting rates have been increasing.[62][63]

In addition to manual inspection and logging of features identified in a
visual inspection, cores can be optically scanned so that a digital visual
record is available. This requires the core to be cut lengthwise, so that a
flat surface is created.[64]

### Isotopic analysis[edit]

The isotopic composition of the oxygen in a core can be used to model the
temperature history of the ice sheet. Oxygen has three stable isotopes, 16  
O, 17  
O and 18  
O.[65] The ratio between 18  
O and 16  
O indicates the temperature when the snow fell.[66] Because 16  
O is lighter than 18  
O, water containing 16  
O is slightly more likely to turn into vapour, and water containing 18  
O is slightly more likely to condense from vapour into rain or snow crystals.
At lower temperatures, the difference is more pronounced. The standard method
of recording the 18  
O/16  
O ratio is to subtract the ratio in a standard known as standard mean ocean
water (SMOW):[66]

δ 18 O = ( ( 18 O 16 O ) s a m p l e ( 18 O 16 O ) S M O W − 1 ) × 1000 o / o
o , {\displaystyle \mathrm {\delta ^{18}O} ={\Biggl (}\mathrm {\frac {{\bigl
(}{\frac {^{18}O}{^{16}O}}{\bigr )} _{sample}}{{\bigl (}{\frac
{^{18}O}{^{16}O}}{\bigr )}_ {SMOW}}} -1{\Biggr )}\times 1000\ ^{o}!/!_{oo},}
![{\\displaystyle \\mathrm {\\delta ^{18}O} ={\\Biggl \(}\\mathrm {\\frac

{{\\bigl \(}{\\frac {^{18}O}{^{16}O}}{\\bigr \)}_{sample}}{{\\bigl \(}{\\frac

{^{18}O}{^{16}O}}{\\bigr \)}_{SMOW}}} -1{\\Biggr \)}\\times 1000\\

^{o}\\!/\\!_{oo},}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/e2a57b00208b0420b0f09071f2b9c54f337e4d26)

where the ‰ sign indicates parts per thousand.[66] A sample with the same 18  
O/16  
O ratio as SMOW has a δ18O of 0‰; a sample that is depleted in 18  
O has a negative δ18O.[66] Combining the δ18O measurements of an ice core
sample with the borehole temperature at the depth it came from provides
additional information, in some cases leading to significant corrections to
the temperatures deduced from the δ18O data.[67][68] Not all boreholes can be
used in these analyses. If the site has experienced significant melting in the
past, the borehole will no longer preserve an accurate temperature record.[69]

Hydrogen ratios can also be used to calculate a temperature history. Deuterium
(2  
H, or D) is heavier than hydrogen (1  
H) and makes water more likely to condense and less likely to evaporate. A δD
ratio can be defined in the same way as δ18O.[70][71] There is a linear
relationship between δ18O and δD:[72]

δ D = 8 × δ 18 O + d , {\displaystyle \mathrm {\delta D} =8\times \mathrm
{\delta ^{18}O} +\mathrm {d} ,} ![{\\displaystyle \\mathrm {\\delta D}

=8\\times \\mathrm {\\delta ^{18}O} +\\mathrm {d}

,}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/a507c0636f80889bbe008a59c8c8a1f2c458c969)

where d is the deuterium excess. It was once thought that this meant it was
unnecessary to measure both ratios in a given core, but in 1979 Merlivat and
Jouzel showed that the deuterium excess reflects the temperature, relative
humidity, and wind speed of the ocean where the moisture originated. Since
then it has been customary to measure both.[72]

Water isotope records, analyzed in cores from Camp Century and Dye 3 in
Greenland, were instrumental in the discovery of Dansgaard-Oeschger
events—rapid warming at the onset of an interglacial, followed by slower
cooling.[73] Other isotopic ratios have been studied, for example, the ratio
between 13  
C and 12  
C can provide information about past changes in the carbon cycle. Combining
this information with records of carbon dioxide levels, also obtained from ice
cores, provides information about the mechanisms behind changes in CO  
2 over time.[74]

### Palaeoatmospheric sampling[edit]

![Graph showing the relationship between depth below surface, and fraction of

surface concentration at the surface, for multiple

gases](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/6/6f/Greenland_firn_CFCs.png/268px-

Greenland_firn_CFCs.png)

Ozone-depleting gases in Greenland firn.[75]

It was understood in the 1960s that analyzing the air trapped in ice cores
would provide useful information on the paleoatmosphere, but it was not until
the late 1970s that a reliable extraction method was developed. Early results
included a demonstration that the CO  
2 concentration was 30% less at the last glacial maximum than just before the
start of the industrial age. Further research has demonstrated a reliable
correlation between CO  
2 levels and the temperature calculated from ice isotope data.[76]

Because CH  
4 (methane) is produced in lakes and wetlands, the amount in the atmosphere is
correlated with the strength of monsoons, which are in turn correlated with
the strength of low-latitude summer insolation. Since insolation depends on
orbital cycles, for which a timescale is available from other sources, CH  
4 can be used to determine the relationship between core depth and
age.[60][61] N  
2O (nitrous oxide) levels are also correlated with glacial cycles, though at
low temperatures the graph differs somewhat from the CO  
2 and CH  
4 graphs.[76][77] Similarly, the ratio between N  
2 (nitrogen) and O  
2 (oxygen) can be used to date ice cores: as air is gradually trapped by the
snow turning to firn and then ice, O  
2 is lost more easily than N  
2, and the relative amount of O  
2 correlates with the strength of local summer insolation. This means that the
trapped air retains, in the ratio of O  
2 to N  
2, a record of the summer insolation, and hence combining this data with
orbital cycle data establishes an ice core dating scheme.[60][78]

Diffusion within the firn layer causes other changes that can be measured.
Gravity causes heavier molecules to be enriched at the bottom of a gas column,
with the amount of enrichment depending on the difference in mass between the
molecules. Colder temperatures cause heavier molecules to be more enriched at
the bottom of a column. These fractionation processes in trapped air,
determined by the measurement of the 15  
N/14  
N ratio and of neon, krypton and xenon, have been used to infer the thickness
of the firn layer, and determine other palaeoclimatic information such as past
mean ocean temperatures.[68] Some gases such as helium can rapidly diffuse
through ice, so it may be necessary to test for these "fugitive gases" within
minutes of the core being retrieved to obtain accurate data.[33]
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which contribute to the greenhouse effect and also
cause ozone loss in the stratosphere,[79] can be detected in ice cores after
about 1950; almost all CFCs in the atmosphere were created by human
activity.[79][80]

### Glaciochemistry[edit]

Summer snow in Greenland contains some sea salt, blown from the surrounding
waters; there is less of it in winter, when much of the sea surface is covered
by pack ice. Similarly, hydrogen peroxide appears only in summer snow because
its production in the atmosphere requires sunlight. These seasonal changes can
be detected because they lead to changes in the electrical conductivity of the
ice. Placing two electrodes with a high voltage between them on the surface of
the ice core gives a measurement of the conductivity at that point. Dragging
them down the length of the core, and recording the conductivity at each
point, gives a graph that shows an annual periodicity. Such graphs also
identify chemical changes caused by non-seasonal events such as forest fires
and major volcanic eruptions. When a known volcanic event, such as the
eruption of Laki in Iceland in 1783, can be identified in the ice core record,
it provides a cross-check on the age determined by layer counting.[81]
Material from Laki can be identified in Greenland ice cores, but did not
spread as far as Antarctica; the 1815 eruption of Tambora in Indonesia
injected material into the stratosphere, and can be identified in both
Greenland and Antarctic ice cores. If the date of the eruption is not known,
but it can be identified in multiple cores, then dating the ice can in turn
give a date for the eruption, which can then be used as a reference layer.[82]
This was done, for example, in an analysis of the climate for the period from
535 to 550 AD, which was thought to be influenced by an otherwise unknown
tropical eruption in about 533 AD; but which turned out to be caused by two
eruptions, one in 535 or early 536 AD, and a second one in 539 or 540 AD.[83]
There are also more ancient reference points, such as the eruption of Toba
about 72,000 years ago.[82]

Many other elements and molecules have been detected in ice cores.[84] In
1969, it was discovered that lead levels in Greenland ice had increased by a
factor of over 200 since pre-industrial times, and increases in other elements
produced by industrial processes, such as copper, cadmium, and zinc, have also
been recorded.[85] The presence of nitric and sulfuric acid (HNO  
3 and H  
2SO  
4) in precipitation can be shown to correlate with increasing fuel combustion
over time. Methanesulfonate (MSA) (CH  
3SO−  
3) is produced in the atmosphere by marine organisms, so ice core records of
MSA provide information on the history of the oceanic environment. Both
hydrogen peroxide (H  
2O  
2) and formaldehyde (HCHO) have been studied, along with organic molecules
such as carbon black that are linked to vegetation emissions and forest
fires.[84] Some species, such as calcium and ammonium, show strong seasonal
variation. In some cases there are contributions from more than one source to
a given species: for example, Ca++ comes from dust as well as from marine
sources; the marine input is much greater than the dust input and so although
the two sources peak at different times of the year, the overall signal shows
a peak in the winter, when the marine input is at a maximum.[86] Seasonal
signals can be erased at sites where the accumulation is low, by surface
winds; in these cases it is not possible to date individual layers of ice
between two reference layers.[87]

Some of the deposited chemical species may interact with the ice, so what is
detected in an ice core is not necessarily what was originally deposited.
Examples include HCHO and H  
2O  
2. Another complication is that in areas with low accumulation rates, deposition from fog can increase the concentration in the snow, sometimes to the point where the atmospheric concentration could be overestimated by a factor of two.[88]

Soluble impurities found in ice cores[89] Source | Via | Measured in polar ice  
---|---|---  
Oceans | Waves and wind | Sea salt: Na+  
, Cl−  
, Mg2+  
, Ca2+  
, SO2−  
4, K+

Land | Aridity and wind | Terrestrial salts: Mg2+  
, Ca2+  
, CO2−  
3, SO2−  
4, aluminosilicates  
Human and biological gas emissions: SO  
2, (CH  
3)  
2S, H  
2S, COS, NO  
x, NH  
3, hydrocarbons and halocarbons | Atmospheric chemistry: O  
3, H  
2O  
2, OH, RO  
2, NO  
3, | H+  
, NH+  
4, Cl−  
, NO−  
3, SO2−  
4, CH  
3SO−  
3, F−  
, HCOO−  
, other organic compounds

### Radionuclides[edit]

![Graph showing abundance of 36Cl against snow depth, showing a spike at the

time of above-ground nuclear

testing](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/3/33/Upper_Fremont_glacier_ice_cl36.png/300px-

Upper_Fremont_glacier_ice_cl36.png)

36Cl from 1960s nuclear testing in US glacier ice.

Galactic cosmic rays produce 10  
Be in the atmosphere at a rate that depends on the solar magnetic field. The
strength of the field is related to the intensity of solar radiation, so the
level of 10  
Be in the atmosphere is a proxy for climate. Accelerator mass spectrometry can
detect the low levels of 10  
Be in ice cores, about 10,000 atoms in a gram of ice, and these can be used to
provide long-term records of solar activity.[90] Tritium (3  
H), created by nuclear weapons testing in the 1950s and 1960s, has been
identified in ice cores,[91] and both 36Cl and 239  
Pu have been found in ice cores in Antarctica and Greenland.[92][93][94]
Chlorine-36, which has a half-life of 301,000 years, has been used to date
cores, as have krypton (85  
Kr, with a half-life of 11 years), lead (210  
Pb, 22 years), and silicon (32  
Si, 172 years).[87]

### Other inclusions[edit]

Meteorites and micrometeorites that land on polar ice are sometimes
concentrated by local environmental processes. For example, there are places
in Antarctica where winds evaporate surface ice, concentrating the solids that
are left behind, including meteorites. Meltwater ponds can also contain
meteorites. At the South Pole Station, ice in a well is melted to provide a
water supply, leaving micrometeorites behind. These have been collected by a
robotic "vacuum cleaner" and examined, leading to improved estimates of their
flux and mass distribution.[95] The well is not an ice core, but the age of
the ice that was melted is known, so the age of the recovered particles can be
determined. The well becomes about 10 m deeper each year, so micrometeorites
collected in a given year are about 100 years older than those from the
previous year.[96] Pollen, an important component of sediment cores, can also
be found in ice cores. It provides information on changes in vegetation.[97]

### Physical properties[edit]

In addition to the impurities in a core and the isotopic composition of the
water, the physical properties of the ice are examined. Features such as
crystal size and axis orientation can reveal the history of ice flow patterns
in the ice sheet. The crystal size can also be used to determine dates, though
only in shallow cores.[98]

## History[edit]

See also: History of scientific ice drilling

### Early years[edit]

![A man on a walkway between two high shelf racks loaded with ice core

samples](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b7/2000_core-

repository02_hg.jpg/220px-2000_core-repository02_hg.jpg)

A store of core samples

In 1841 and 1842, Louis Agassiz drilled holes in the Unteraargletscher in the
Alps; these were drilled with iron rods and did not produce cores. The deepest
hole achieved was 60 m. On Erich von Drygalski's Antarctic expedition in 1902
and 1903, 30 m holes were drilled in an iceberg south of the Kerguelen Islands
and temperature readings were taken. The first scientist to create a snow
sampling tool was James E. Church, described by Pavel Talalay as "the father
of modern snow surveying". In the winter of 1908–1909, Church constructed
steel tubes with slots and cutting heads to retrieve cores of snow up to 3 m
long. Similar devices are in use today, modified to allow sampling to a depth
of about 9 m. They are simply pushed into the snow and rotated by hand.[99]

The first systematic study of snow and firn layers was by Ernst Sorge, who was
part of the Alfred Wegener Expedition to central Greenland in 1930–1931. Sorge
dug a 15 m pit to examine the snow layers, and his results were later
formalized into Sorge's Law of Densification by Henri Bader, who went on to do
additional coring work in northwest Greenland in 1933.[100] In the early
1950s, a SIPRE expedition took pit samples over much of the Greenland ice
sheet, obtaining early oxygen isotope ratio data. Three other expeditions in
the 1950s began ice coring work: a joint Norwegian-British-Swedish Antarctic
Expedition (NBSAE), in Queen Maud Land in Antarctica; the Juneau Ice Field
Research Project (JIRP), in Alaska; and Expéditions Polaires Françaises, in
central Greenland. Core quality was poor, but some scientific work was done on
the retrieved ice.[101]

The International Geophysical Year (1957–1958) saw increased glaciology
research around the world, with one of the high priority research targets
being deep cores in polar regions. SIPRE conducted pilot drilling trials in
1956 (to 305 m) and 1957 (to 411 m) at Site 2 in Greenland; the second core,
with the benefit of the previous year's drilling experience, was retrieved in
much better condition, with fewer gaps.[102] In Antarctica, a 307 m core was
drilled at Byrd Station in 1957–1958, and a 264 m core at Little America V, on
the Ross Ice Shelf, the following year.[103] The success of the IGY core
drilling led to increased interest in improving ice coring capabilities, and
was followed by a CRREL project at Camp Century, where in the early 1960s
three holes were drilled, the deepest reaching the base of the ice sheet at
1387 m in July 1966.[104] The drill used at Camp Century then went to Byrd
Station, where a 2164 m hole was drilled to bedrock before the drill was
frozen into the borehole by sub-ice meltwater and had to be abandoned.[105]

French, Australian and Canadian projects from the 1960s and 1970s include a
905 m core at Dome C in Antarctica, drilled by CNRS; cores at Law Dome drilled
by ANARE, starting in 1969 with a 382 m core; and Devon Ice Cap cores
recovered by a Canadian team in the 1970s.[106]

### Antarctica deep cores[edit]

![Graph showing CO2 levels, highlit to indicate glacial

cycles](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c9/Co2_glacial_cycles_800k.png/300px-

Co2_glacial_cycles_800k.png)

Composite data for Dome C, CO2 levels (ppm) going back nearly 800,000 years,
and related glacial cycles.

Soviet ice drilling projects began in the 1950s, in Franz Josef Land, the
Urals, Novaya Zemlya, and at Mirny and Vostok in the Antarctic; not all these
early holes retrieved cores.[107] Over the following decades work continued at
multiple locations in Asia.[108] Drilling in the Antarctic focused mostly on
Mirny and Vostok, with a series of deep holes at Vostok begun in 1970.[109]
The first deep hole at Vostok reached 506.9 m in April 1970; by 1973 a depth
of 952 m had been reached. A subsequent hole, Vostok 2, drilled from 1971 to
1976, reached 450 m, and Vostok 3 reached 2202 m in 1985 after six drilling
seasons.[110] Vostok 3 was the first core to retrieve ice from the previous
glacial period, 150,000 years ago.[111] Drilling was interrupted by a fire at
the camp in 1982, but further drilling began in 1984, eventually reaching 2546
m in 1989. A fifth Vostok core was begun in 1990, reached 3661 m in 2007, and
was later extended to 3769 m.[106][111] The estimated age of the ice is
420,000 years at 3310 m depth; below that point it is difficult to interpret
the data reliably because of mixing of the ice.[112]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1e/EPICA_delta_D_plot.svg/400px-

EPICA_delta_D_plot.svg.png)

The EPICA Dome C and Vostok ice cores compared

EPICA, a European ice coring collaboration, was formed in the 1990s, and two
holes were drilled in East Antarctica: one at Dome C, which reached 2871 m in
only two seasons of drilling, but which took another four years to reach
bedrock at 3260 m; and one at Kohnen Station, which reached bedrock at 2760 m
in 2006. The Dome C core had very low accumulation rates, which mean that the
climate record extended a long way; by the end of the project the usable data
extended to 800,000 years ago.[112]

Other deep Antarctic cores included a Japanese project at Dome F, which
reached 2503 m in 1996, with an estimated age of 330,000 years for the bottom
of the core; and a subsequent hole at the same site which reached 3035 m in
2006, estimated to reach ice 720,000 years old.[112] US teams drilled at
McMurdo Station in the 1990s, and at Taylor Dome (554 m in 1994) and Siple
Dome (1004 m in 1999), with both cores reaching ice from the last glacial
period.[112][113] The West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) project, completed in
2011, reached 3405 m; the site has high snow accumulation so the ice only
extends back 62,000 years, but as a consequence, the core provides high
resolution data for the period it covers.[60] A 948 m core was drilled at
Berkner Island by a project managed by the British Antarctic Survey from 2002
to 2005, extending into the last glacial period;[60] and an Italian-managed
ITASE project completed a 1620 m core at Talos Dome in 2007.[60][114]

In 2016, cores were retrieved from the Allan Hills in Antarctica in an area
where old ice lay near the surface. The cores were dated by potassium-argon
dating; traditional ice core dating is not possible as not all layers were
present. The oldest core was found to include ice from 2.7 million years
ago—by far the oldest ice yet dated from a core.[115]

### Greenland deep cores[edit]

In 1970, scientific discussions began which resulted in the Greenland Ice
Sheet Project (GISP), a multinational investigation into the Greenland ice
sheet that lasted until 1981. Years of field work were required to determine
the ideal location for a deep core; the field work included several
intermediate-depth cores, at Dye 3 (372 m in 1971), Milcent (398 m in 1973)
and Crete (405 m in 1974), among others. A location in north-central Greenland
was selected as ideal, but financial constraints forced the group to drill at
Dye 3 instead, beginning in 1979. The hole reached bedrock at 2037 m, in 1981.
Two holes, 30 km apart, were eventually drilled at the north-central location
in the early 1990s by two groups: GRIP, a European consortium, and GISP-2, a
group of US universities. GRIP reached bedrock at 3029 m in 1992, and GISP-2
reached bedrock at 3053 m the following year.[116] Both cores were limited to
about 100,000 years of climatic information, and since this was thought to be
connected to the topography of the rock underlying the ice sheet at the drill
sites, a new site was selected 200 km north of GRIP, and a new project,
NorthGRIP, was launched as an international consortium led by Denmark.
Drilling began in 1996; the first hole had to be abandoned at 1400 m in 1997,
and a new hole was begun in 1999, reaching 3085 m in 2003. The hole did not
reach bedrock, but terminated at a subglacial river. The core provided
climatic data back to 123,000 years ago, which covered part of the last
interglacial period. The subsequent North Greenland Eemian (NEEM) project
retrieved a 2537 m core in 2010 from a site further north, extending the
climatic record to 128,500 years ago;[111] NEEM was followed by EastGRIP,
which began in 2015 in east Greenland and is expected to be complete in
2020.[117]

### Non-polar cores[edit]

Ice cores have been drilled at locations away from the poles, notably in the
Himalayas and the Andes. Some of these cores reach back to the last glacial
period, but they are more important as records of El Niño events and of
monsoon seasons in south Asia.[60] Cores have also been drilled on Mount
Kilimanjaro,[60] in the Alps,[60] and in Indonesia,[118] New Zealand,[119]
Iceland,[120] Scandinavia,[121] Canada,[122] and the US.[123]

## Future plans[edit]

IPICS (International Partnerships in Ice Core Sciences) has produced a series
of white papers outlining future challenges and scientific goals for the ice
core science community. These include plans to:[124]

                    
                                                * Retrieve ice cores that reach back over 1.2 million years, in order to obtain multiple iterations of ice core record for the 40,000-year long climate cycles known to have operated at that time. Current cores reach back over 800,000 years, and show 100,000-year cycles.
                            * Improve ice core chronologies, including connecting chronologies of multiple cores.
                            * Identify additional proxies from ice cores, for example for sea ice, marine biological productivity, or forest fires.
                            * Drill additional cores to provide high-resolution data for the last 2,000 years, to use as input for detailed climate modelling.
                            * Identify an improved drilling fluid
                            * Improve the ability to handle brittle ice, both while drilling and in transport and storage
                            * Find a way to handle cores which have pressurised water at bedrock
                            * Come up with a standardised lightweight drill capable of drilling both wet and dry holes, and able to reach depths of up to 1000 m.
                            * Improve core handling to maximise the information that can be obtained from each core.
                    

## See also[edit]

                    
                                                * List of ice cores
                            * Ice drilling
                    

## References[edit]

                    
                                                1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Alley 2000, pp. 71–73.
                            2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Alley 2000, pp. 48–50.
                            3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Talalay 2016, p. 263.
                            4. **^** Bradley, Raymond S. (2015). _Paleoclimatology: Reconstructing Climates of the Quaternary_. Amsterdam: Academic Press. p. 138. ISBN 978-0-12-386913-5.
                            5. **^** Alley 2000, pp. 35–36.
                            6. **^** Knight, Peter G. (1999). _Glaciers_. Cheltenham, UK: Stanley Thornes. p. 206. ISBN 978-0-7487-4000-0.
                            7. **^** Tulaczyk, S.; Elliot, D.; Vogel, S.W.; Powell, R.D.; Priscu, J.C.; Clow, G.D. (2002). FASTDRILL: Interdisciplinary Polar Research Based on Fast Ice-Sheet Drilling (PDF) (Report). 2002 FASTDRILL Workshop. p. 9.
                            8. **^** Gabrielli, Paolo; Vallelonga, Paul (2015). "Contaminant Records in Ice Cores". In Blais, Jules M.; et al. (eds.). _Environmental Contaminants: Using Natural Archives to Track Sources and Long-Term Trends of Pollution_. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer. p. 395. ISBN 978-94-017-9540-1.
                            9. **^** Alley 2000, pp. 43–46.
                            10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Talalay 2016, pp. 34–35.
                            11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Talalay 2016, p. 59.
                            12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Talalay 2016, p. 7.
                            13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Talalay 2016, p. 77.
                            14. **^** "Deep drilling with the Hans Tausen drill". Niels Bohr Institute Centre for Ice and Climate. 2 October 2008. Retrieved  3 June 2017.
                            15. **^** Sheldon, Simon G.; Popp, Trevor J.; Hansen, Steffen B.; Steffensen, Jørgen P. (26 July 2017). "Promising new borehole liquids for ice-core drilling on the East Antarctic high plateau". _Annals of Glaciology_. **55** (68): 260–270. doi:10.3189/2014AoG68A043.
                            16. **^** Talalay 2016, pp. 259–263.
                            17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Talalay 2016, p. 101.
                            18. **^** Talalay 2016, p. 79.
                            19. **^** Talalay 2016, pp. 109–111.
                            20. **^** Talalay 2016, pp. 173–175.
                            21. **^** Talalay 2016, pp. 252–254.
                            22. **^** Zagorodnov, V.; Thompson, L.G. (26 July 2017). "Thermal electric ice-core drills: history and new design options for intermediate-depth drilling". _Annals of Glaciology_. **55** (68): 322–330. doi:10.3189/2014AoG68A012.
                            23. **^** National Research Council of the National Academies (2007). _Exploration of Antarctic Subglacial Aquatic Environments: Environmental and Scientific Stewardship_. Washington DC: National Academies Press. pp. 82–84. ISBN 978-0-309-10635-1.
                            24. **^** Schwikowski, Margit; Jenk, Theo M.; Stampfli, Dieter; Stampfli, Felix (26 July 2017). "A new thermal drilling system for high-altitude or temperate glaciers". _Annals of Glaciology_. **55** (68): 131–136. doi:10.3189/2014AoG68A024.
                            25. **^** Anonymous (30 June 2017), Ice Drilling Design and Operations: Long Range Technology Plan, p. 24.
                            26. **^** Petersen, Sandra (23 February 2016). "EastGrip – The East Greenland Ice-core Project". _East Greenland Ice Core Project_. Retrieved  17 June 2017.
                            27. **^** Madsen, Martin Vindbæk (14 April 2016). "Partners". _East Greenland Ice Core Project_. Archived from the original on 28 June 2017. Retrieved  17 June 2017.
                            28. **^** Dahl-Jensen et al., pp. 17–19.
                            29. **^** Petersen, Sandra (23 February 2016). "About EastGRIP". _East Greenland Ice Core Project_. Archived from the original on 28 June 2017. Retrieved  17 June 2017.
                            30. **^** Dahl-Jensen et al., pp. 8–9.
                            31. **^** Kolbert, Elizabeth (24 October 2016). "When a Country Melts". _The New Yorker_. Retrieved  17 June 2017.
                            32. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ UNH, Joe Souney. "About Ice Cores :: Drilling Ice Cores". National Ice Core Laboratory. Archived from the original on 4 May 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2017.
                            33. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Souney et al. 2014, pp. 16–19.
                            34. **^** Hinkley, Todd (9 December 2003). "International ice core community meets to discuss best practices for ice core curation". _Eos Trans AGU_. **84** (49): 549. doi:10.1029/2003EO490006..
                            35. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Souney et al. 2014, pp. 20–21.
                            36. **^** Uchida, Tsutomu; Duval, P.; Lipenkov, V.Ya.; Hondoh, T.; Mae, S.; Shoji, H. (1994). "Brittle zone and air-hydrate formation in polar ice sheets". _Memoirs of National Institute of Polar Research_ (49): 302..
                            37. **^** Talalay 2016, pp. 265–266.
                            38. **^** Walker, Mike (2005). _Quaternary Dating Methods_ (PDF). Chichester: John Wiley & Sons. p. 150. ISBN 978-0-470-86927-7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 July 2014.
                            39. **^** Bazin, L.; Landais, A.; Lemieux-Dudon, B.; Toyé Mahamadou Kele, H.; Veres, D.; Parrenin, F.; Martinerie, P.; Ritz, C.; Capron, E.; Lipenkov, V.; Loutre, M.-F.; Raynaud, D.; Vinther, B.; Svensson, A.; Rasmussen, S. O.; Severi, M.; Blunier, T.; Leuenberger, M.; Fischer, H.; Masson-Delmotte, V.; Chappellaz, J.; Wolff, E. (1 August 2013). "An optimized multi-proxy, multi-site Antarctic ice and gas orbital chronology (AICC2012): 120–800 ka". _Climate of the Past_. **9** (4): 1715–1731. doi:10.5194/cp-9-1715-2013.
                            40. **^** Jouzel 2013, pp. 2530–2531.
                            41. **^** Jouzel 2013, p. 2535.
                            42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Alley 2010, p. 1098.
                            43. **^** Wilson, A.T.; Donahue, D.J. (1992). "AMS radiocarbon dating of ice: validity of the technique and the problem of cosmogenic _in-situ_ production in polar ice cores". _Radiocarbon_. **34** (3): 431–435. doi:10.1017/S0033822200063657.
                            44. **^** Uglietti, Chiara; Zapf, Alexander; Jenk, Theo Manuel; Sigl, Michael; Szidat, Sönke; Salazar, Gary; Schwikowski, Margit (21 December 2016). "Radiocarbon dating of glacier ice: overview, optimisation, validation and potential". _The Cryosphere_. **10** (6): 3091–3105. doi:10.5194/tc-10-3091-2016.
                            45. **^** "An extremely brief reversal of the geomagnetic field, climate variability and a super volcano". _Phys.org_. ScienceX network. 16 October 2012. Retrieved  29 May 2017.
                            46. **^** Blunier et al. 2007, p. 325.
                            47. **^** Landais et al. 2012, pp. 191–192.
                            48. **^** Blunier et al. 2007, pp. 325–327.
                            49. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Landais et al. 2012, p. 192.
                            50. **^** Elias, Scott; Mock, Cary, eds. (2013). "Volcanic Tephra Layers". _Encyclopedia of Quaternary Science_. Amsterdam: Elsevier. ISBN 9780444536426.
                            51. **^** Aciego, S.; et al. (15 April 2010). "Toward a radiometric ice clock: U-series of the Dome C ice core" (PDF). _TALDICE-EPICA Science Meeting_ : 1–2.
                            52. **^** Lowe & Walker 2014, p. 315.
                            53. **^** Toyé Mahamadou Kele, H.; et al. (22 April 2012). _Toward unified ice core chronologies with the DatIce tool_ (pdf). EGU General Assembly 2012. Vienna, Austria. Retrieved 5 September 2017.
                            54. **^** Walker, Mike; Johnsen, Sigfus; Rasmussen, Sune Olander; Popp, Trevor; Steffensen, Jørgen-Peder; Gibbard, Phil; Hoek, Wim; Lowe, John; Andrews, John; Björck, Svante; Cwynar, Les C.; Hughen, Konrad; Kershaw, Peter; Kromer, Bernd; Litt, Thomas; Lowe, David J.; Nakagawa, Takeshi; Newnham, Rewi; Schwander, Jakob (January 2009). "Formal definition and dating of the GSSP (Global Stratotype Section and Point) for the base of the Holocene using the Greenland NGRIP ice core, and selected auxiliary records". _Journal of Quaternary Science_. **24** (1): 3–17. doi:10.1002/jqs.1227.
                            55. **^** Gow, Anthony (12 October 2001). "Summer and winter core layers". NOAA. Archived from the original on 13 February 2010.
                            56. **^** Alley 2000, pp. 44–48.
                            57. **^** Alley 2000, p. 49.
                            58. **^** Alley 2000, pp. 50–51.
                            59. **^** Alley 2000, p. 56.
                            60. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ Jouzel 2013, p. 2530.
                            61. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ruddiman, William F.; Raymo, Maureen E. (2003). "Core handling and processing for the WAIS Divide ice-core project" (PDF). _Quaternary Science Reviews_. **22** (68): 141–142. doi:10.3189/2014AoG68A008.
                            62. **^** Jouzel 2013, p. 2533.
                            63. **^** Fisher, David (2011). "Recent melt rates of Canadian arctic ice caps are the highest in four millennia" (PDF). _Global and Planetary Climate Change_. 84–85: 1–4. doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2011.06.005.
                            64. **^** Souney et al. 2014, p. 25.
                            65. **^** Barbalace, Kenneth L. "Periodic Table of Elements: O – Oxygen". EnvironmentalChemistry.com. Retrieved 20 May 2017.
                            66. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Lowe & Walker 2014, pp. 165–170.
                            67. **^** Alley 2000, pp. 65–70.
                            68. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jouzel 2013, p. 2532.
                            69. **^** Alley 2010, p. 1097.
                            70. **^** "Isotopes and the delta notation". Centre for Ice and Climate. 8 September 2009. Retrieved  25 May 2017.
                            71. **^** Mulvaney, Robert (20 September 2004). "How are past temperatures determined from an ice core?". Scientific American. Retrieved 25 May 2017.
                            72. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jouzel 2013, pp. 2533–2534.
                            73. **^** Jouzel 2013, p. 2531.
                            74. **^** Bauska, Thomas K.; Baggenstos, Daniel; Brook, Edward J.; Mix, Alan C.; Marcott, Shaun A.; Petrenko, Vasilii V.; Schaefer, Hinrich; Severinghaus, Jeffrey P.; Lee, James E. (29 March 2016). "Carbon isotopes characterize rapid changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide during the last deglaciation". _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_. **113** (13): 3465–3470. doi:10.1073/pnas.1513868113. PMC 4822573. PMID 26976561.
                            75. **^** "Climate Prediction Center – Expert Assessments". National Weather Service Climate Prediction Center. Retrieved  3 June 2017.
                            76. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jouzel 2013, p. 2534.
                            77. **^** Schilt, Adrian; Baumgartner, Matthias; Blunierc, Thomas; Schwander, Jakob; Spahni, Renato; Fischer, Hubertus; Stocker, Thomas F. (2009). "Glacial-interglacial and millennial-scale variations in the atmospheric nitrous oxide concentration during the last 800,000 years" (PDF). _Quaternary Science Reviews_. **29** (1–2): 182–192. doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2009.03.011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2017.
                            78. **^** Landais et al. 2012, p. 191.
                            79. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Neelin, J. David (2010). _Climate Change and Climate Modeling_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-521-84157-3.
                            80. **^** Martinerie, P.; Nourtier-Mazauric, E.; Barnola, J.-M.; Sturges, W. T.; Worton, D. R.; Atlas, E.; Gohar, L. K.; Shine, K. P.; Brasseur, G. P. (17 June 2009). "Long-lived halocarbon trends and budgets from atmospheric chemistry modelling constrained with measurements in polar firn". _Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics_. **9** (12): 3911–3934. doi:10.5194/acp-9-3911-2009.
                            81. **^** Alley 2000, pp. 51–55.
                            82. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Legrand & Mayewski 1997, pp. 222, 225.
                            83. **^** Sigl, M.; Winstrup, M.; McConnell, J. R.; Welten, K. C.; Plunkett, G.; Ludlow, F.; Büntgen, U.; Caffee, M.; Chellman, N.; Dahl-Jensen, D.; Fischer, H.; Kipfstuhl, S.; Kostick, C.; Maselli, O. J.; Mekhaldi, F.; Mulvaney, R.; Muscheler, R.; Pasteris, D. R.; Pilcher, J. R.; Salzer, M.; Schüpbach, S.; Steffensen, J. P.; Vinther, B. M.; Woodruff, T. E. (8 July 2015). "Timing and climate forcing of volcanic eruptions for the past 2,500 years". _Nature_. **523** (7562): 543–549. doi:10.1038/nature14565. PMID 26153860.
                            84. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Legrand & Mayewski 1997, p. 221.
                            85. **^** Legrand & Mayewski 1997, pp. 231–232.
                            86. **^** Legrand & Mayewski 1997, p. 222.
                            87. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Legrand & Mayewski 1997, p. 225.
                            88. **^** Legrand & Mayewski 1997, pp. 227–228.
                            89. **^** Legrand & Mayewski 1997, p. 228.
                            90. **^** Pedro, J.B. (2011). "High-resolution records of the beryllium-10 solar activity proxy in ice from Law Dome, East Antarctica: measurement, reproducibility and principal trends". _Climate of the Past_. **7** (3): 707–708. doi:10.5194/cp-7-707-2011.
                            91. **^** Wagenhach, D.; Graf, W.; Minikin, A.; Trefzer, U.; Kipfstuhl, J.; Oerter, H.; Blindow, N. (20 January 2017). "Reconnaissance of chemical and isotopic firn properties on top of Berkner Island, Antarctica". _Annals of Glaciology_. **20** : 307–312. doi:10.3189/172756494794587401.
                            92. **^** Arienzo, M. M.; McConnell, J. R.; Chellman, N.; Criscitiello, A. S.; Curran, M.; Fritzsche, D.; Kipfstuhl, S.; Mulvaney, R.; Nolan, M.; Opel, T.; Sigl, M.; Steffensen, J.P. (5 July 2016). "A Method for Continuous Pu Determinations in Arctic and Antarctic Ice Cores" (PDF). _Environmental Science & Technology_. **50** (13): 7066–7073. doi:10.1021/acs.est.6b01108. PMID 27244483.
                            93. **^** Delmas et al. (2004), pp. 494–496.
                            94. **^** "Future Work". US Geological Survey Central Region Research. 14 January 2005. Archived from the original on 13 September 2005.
                            95. **^** Alley 2000, p. 73.
                            96. **^** Taylor, Susan; Lever, James H.; Harvey, Ralph P.; Govoni, John (May 1997). Collecting micrometeorites from the South Pole Water Well (PDF) (Report). Cold Regions Research and Engineering Lab, Hanover, NH. pp. 1–2. 97–1. Retrieved 14 September 2017.
                            97. **^** Reese, C.A.; Liu, K.B.; Thompson, L.G. (26 July 2017). "An ice-core pollen record showing vegetation response to Late-glacial and Holocene climate changes at Nevado Sajama, Bolivia". _Annals of Glaciology_. **54** (63): 183. doi:10.3189/2013AoG63A375.
                            98. **^** Okuyama, Junichi; Narita, Hideki; Hondoh, Takeo; Koerner, Roy M. (February 2003). "Physical properties of the P96 ice core from Penny Ice Cap, Baffin Island, Canada, and derived climatic records". _Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth_. **108** (B2): 6–1–6–2. doi:10.1029/2001JB001707.
                            99. **^** Talalay 2016, pp. 9–11.
                            100. **^** Langway 2008, pp. 5–6.
                            101. **^** Langway 2008, p. 7.
                            102. **^** Langway 2008, pp. 9–11.
                            103. **^** Langway 2008, pp. 14–15.
                            104. **^** Langway 2008, pp. 17–20.
                            105. **^** Langway 2008, p. 23.
                            106. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jouzel 2013, p. 2527.
                            107. **^** Ueda & Talalay 2007, pp. 3–5.
                            108. **^** Ueda & Talalay 2007, pp. 50–58.
                            109. **^** Ueda & Talalay 2007, pp. 3–26.
                            110. **^** Ueda & Talalay 2007, p. 11.
                            111. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Jouzel 2013, p. 2528.
                            112. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Jouzel 2013, p. 2529.
                            113. **^** Bentley, Charles R.; Koci, Bruce R. (2007). "Drilling to the beds of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets: a review" (PDF). _Annals of Glaciology_. **47** : 3–4. doi:10.3189/172756407786857695.
                            114. **^** Iaccarino, Tony. "TALos Dome Ice CorE – TALDICE". Talos Dome Ice Core. Retrieved 28 May 2017.
                            115. **^** "Record-shattering 2.7-million-year-old ice core reveals start of the ice ages". _Science_. AAAS. 14 August 2017. Retrieved  30 August 2017.
                            116. **^** Langway 2008, pp. 27–28.
                            117. **^** Madsen, Martin Vindbæk (15 March 2016). "Documentation". East Greenland Ice Core Project. Archived from the original on 18 March 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017.
                            118. **^** MacKinnon 1980, p. 41.
                            119. **^** MacKinnon 1980, p. 42.
                            120. **^** MacKinnon 1980, p. 36.
                            121. **^** MacKinnon 1980, p. 39.
                            122. **^** MacKinnon 1980, p. 26-29.
                            123. **^** MacKinnon 1980, p. 30.
                            124. **^** "IPICS White Papers". PAGES – Past Global Changes. Retrieved  17 June 2017.
                    

## Sources[edit]

                    
                                                * Alley, Richard B. (2000). _The Two-Mile Time Machine_. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-10296-2.
                            * Alley, Richard B. (2010). "Reliability of ice-core science: historical insights" (PDF). _Journal of Glaciology_. **56** (200): 1095–1103. doi:10.3189/002214311796406130.
                            * Blunier, T.; Spahni, R.; Barnola, J.-M.; Chappellaz, J.; Loulergue, L.; Schwander, J. (2007). "Synchronization of ice core records via atmospheric gases". _Climate of the Past_. **3** (2): 325–330. doi:10.5194/cp-3-325-2007.
                            * Dahl-Jensen, Dorthe; Kirk, Marie; Larsen, Lars.B.; Sheldon, Simon G.; Steffensen, J.P. "Field season 2016: East GReenland Ice core Project (EGRIP) 2015–2020: Establishing the EGRIP drilling camp" (PDF). Ice and Climate Group, Niels Bohr Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 April 2017.
                            * Jouzel, J. (2013). "A brief history of ice core science over the last 50 yr". _Climate of the Past_. **9** (6): 2525–2547. doi:10.5194/cp-9-2525-2013.
                            * Landais, A.; Dreyfus, G.; Capron, E.; Pol, K.; Loutre, M.F.; Raynaud, D.; Lipenkov, V.Y.; Arnaud, L.; Masson-Delmotte, V.; Paillard, D.; Jouzel, J.; Leuenberger, M. (2012). "Towards orbital dating of the EPICA Dome C ice core using δO2/N2". _Climate of the Past_. **8** : 191–203. doi:10.5194/cp-8-191-2012.
                            * Langway, Chester C. (January 2008). "The history of early polar ice cores" (PDF). _CRREL Report_ (TR-08–1): 1–47. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 November 2016.
                            * Legrand, M.; Mayewski, P. (1997). "Glaciochemistry of polar ice cores: A review". _Reviews of Geophysics_. **35** (3): 219–243. doi:10.1029/96RG03527.
                            * Lowe, J. John; Walker, Mike (2014). _Reconstructing Quaternary Environments_ (3rd ed.). Abingdon, UK: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-74075-3.
                            * MacKinnon, P.K. (1980). _Ice Cores_. Washington DC: World Data Center A for Glaciology [Snow and Ice]. ISSN 0149-1776.
                            * Souney, Joseph M.; Twickler, Mark S.; Hargreaves, Geoffrey M.; Bencivengo, Brian M.; Kippenhan, Matthew J.; Johnson, Jay A.; Cravens, Eric D.; Neff, Peter D.; Nunn, Richard M.; Orsi, Anais J.; Popp, Trevor J.; Rhoades, John F.; Vaughn, Bruce H.; Voigt, Donald E.; Wong, Gifford J.; Taylor, Kendrick C. (31 December 2014). "Core handling and processing for the WAIS Divide ice-core project". _Annals of Glaciology_. **55** (68): 15–26. doi:10.3189/2014AoG68A008.
                            * Talalay, Pavel G. (2016). _Mechanical Ice Drilling Technology_. Beijing: Springer. ISBN 978-7-116-09172-6.
                            * Ueda, Herbert T.; Talalay, Pavel G. (October 2007). Fifty Years of Soviet and Russian Drilling Activity in Polar and Non-Polar Ice (Report). ERDC/CRREL. TR-07-02. Retrieved 14 September 2017.
                    

## External links[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/df/Wikibooks-logo-en-

noslogan.svg/40px-Wikibooks-logo-en-noslogan.svg.png) | The Wikibook
_Historical Geology_ has a page on the topic of: _**Ice cores**_  
---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Ice
cores**_.  
---|---  
* US National Ice Core Laboratory video showing storage and processing of cores * Ice Core Gateway * Byrd Polar Research Center – Ice Core Paleoclimatology Research Group * A misleading graph has been circling the internet since at least 2010
                    
                                                * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Chronology

* * *

Key topics|

                    
                                                * Archaeology
                            * Astronomy
                            * Geology
                            * History
                              * Big History
                            * Paleontology
                            * Time
                    
                            * Eras
                            * Epochs
                    

|

| Calendar eras|

                    
                                                * Human Era
                            * _Ab urbe condita_
                            * Anno Domini / Common Era
                            * Anno Mundi
                            * Byzantine era
                            * Seleucid era
                            * Spanish era
                            * Before Present
                            * Hijri
                            * Egyptian
                            * Sothic cycle
                            * Hindu units of time (Yuga)
                            * Mesoamerican
                              * Long Count
                              * Short Count
                              * Tzolk'in
                              * Haab'
                    

---|---  
Regnal year|

                    
                                                * Canon of Kings
                            * Lists of kings
                            * Limmu
                    

Era names|

                    
                                                * Chinese
                            * Japanese
                            * Korean
                            * Vietnamese
                    

Calendars|

| Pre-Julian / Julian|

                    
                                                * Pre-Julian Roman
                            * Original Julian
                            * Proleptic Julian
                            * Revised Julian
                    

---|---  
Gregorian|

                    
                                                * Gregorian
                            * Proleptic Gregorian
                            * Old Style and New Style dates
                            * Adoption of the Gregorian calendar
                            * Dual dating
                    

Astronomical|

                    
                                                * Lunisolar
                            * Solar
                            * Lunar
                            * Astronomical year numbering
                    

Others|

                    
                                                * Chinese sexagenary cycle
                            * Geologic Calendar
                            * Hebrew
                            * Iranian
                            * Islamic
                            * ISO week date
                            * Mesoamerican
                              * Maya
                              * Aztec
                            * Winter count (Plains Indians)
                    

Astronomic time|

                    
                                                * Cosmic Calendar
                            * Ephemeris
                            * Galactic year
                            * Metonic cycle
                            * Milankovitch cycles
                    

Geologic time|

| Concepts|

                    
                                                * Deep time
                            * Geological history of Earth
                            * Geological time units
                    

---|---  
Standards|

                    
                                                * Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA)
                            * Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP)
                    

Methods|

                    
                                                * Chronostratigraphy
                            * Geochronology
                            * Isotope geochemistry
                            * Law of superposition
                            * Luminescence dating
                            * Samarium–neodymium dating
                    

Chronological  
dating|

| Absolute dating|

                    
                                                * Amino acid racemisation
                            * Archaeomagnetic dating
                            * Dendrochronology
                            * Ice core
                            * Incremental dating
                            * Lichenometry
                            * Paleomagnetism
                            * Radiometric dating
                              * Radiocarbon
                              * Uranium–lead
                              * Potassium–argon
                            * Tephrochronology
                            * Luminescence dating
                            * Thermoluminescence dating
                    

---|---  
Relative dating|

                    
                                                * Fluorine absorption
                            * Nitrogen dating
                            * Obsidian hydration
                            * Seriation
                            * Stratigraphy
                    

Genetic methods|

                    
                                                * Molecular clock
                    

Linguistic methods|

                    
                                                * Glottochronology
                    

Related topics|

                    
                                                * Chronicle
                            * New Chronology
                            * Periodization
                            * Synchronoptic view
                            * Timeline
                            * Year zero
                            * Circa
                            * Floruit
                            * Terminus post quem
                            * ASPRO chronology
                    
                            * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal
                    
                            * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Glaciers

* * *

Types|

                    
                                                * Aufeis
                            * Cirque
                            * Ice cap
                            * Ice field
                            * Ice sheet
                            * Ice shelf
                            * Ice stream
                            * Ledoyom
                            * Outlet glacier
                            * Piedmont glacier
                            * Rock glacier
                            * Valley glacier
                    

Anatomy|

                    
                                                * Ablation zone
                            * Accumulation zone
                            * Bergschrund
                            * Blue ice
                            * Crevasse
                            * Dirt cone
                            * Firn
                            * Glacier cave
                            * Ice divide
                            * Ice tongue
                            * Icefall
                            * Lateral moraine
                            * Medial moraine
                            * Moraine
                            * Moulin
                            * Penitente
                            * Randkluft
                            * Sérac
                            * Terminus
                    

Processes|

                    
                                                * Ablation
                            * Accumulation
                            * Basal sliding
                            * Calving
                            * Creep
                            * Motion
                            * Outburst flood
                            * Overdeepening
                            * Plucking
                            * Retreat
                            * Starvation
                            * Surge
                    

Measurements|

                    
                                                * Ice core
                            * Mass balance
                    

Volcanic relations|

                    
                                                * Jökulhlaup
                            * Subglacial eruption
                            * Subglacial volcano
                            * Tuya
                    

Landforms|

| Erosional|

                    
                                                * Arête
                            * Cirque
                            * Cirque stairway
                            * Crag and tail
                            * Finger lake
                            * Fjord
                            * Glacial horn
                            * Glacial lake
                            * Glacial striae
                            * Hanging valley
                            * Ribbon lake
                            * Roche moutonnée
                            * Suncup
                            * Tarn
                            * Trough lake
                            * Trough valley
                            * Tunnel valley
                            * U-valley
                            * Valley step
                            * _Zungenbecken_
                    

---|---  
Depositional|

                    
                                                * Drumlin
                            * Erratic block
                            * Moraine
                            * Moraine-dammed lake
                            * Pulju moraine
                            * Rogen moraine
                            * Sevetti moraine
                            * Terminal moraine
                            * Till plain
                            * Veiki moraine
                    

Glacifluvial|

                    
                                                * Alpentor
                            * Diluvium
                            * Esker
                            * Giant current ripples
                            * Kame
                            * Kame delta
                            * Kettle hole
                            * Outwash fan
                            * Sandur
                            * Urstromtal
                    
                            * Glaciology
                            * Category
                            * List
                            * Template:Periglacial environment
                    

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

                    
                                                * LCCN: sh2005004104
                    

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ice_core&oldid=899788917"

Categories:

                    
                                                * Incremental dating
                            * Water ice
                            * Glaciology
                    

Hidden categories:

                    
                                                * CS1: long volume value
                            * Use dmy dates from June 2018
                            * Articles with short description
                            * Featured articles
                            * Use British English from October 2017
                            * Commons category link is on Wikidata
                            * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
                    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                    
                                                * Not logged in
                            * Talk
                            * Contributions
                            * Create account
                            * Log in
                    

### Namespaces

                    
                                                * Article
                            * Talk
                    

### Variants

### Views

                    
                                                * Read
                            * Edit
                            * View history
                    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                    
                                                * Main page
                            * Contents
                            * Featured content
                            * Current events
                            * Random article
                            * Donate to Wikipedia
                            * Wikipedia store
                    

### Interaction

                    
                                                * Help
                            * About Wikipedia
                            * Community portal
                            * Recent changes
                            * Contact page
                    

### Tools

                    
                                                * What links here
                            * Related changes
                            * Upload file
                            * Special pages
                            * Permanent link
                            * Page information
                            * Wikidata item
                            * Cite this page
                    

### In other projects

                    
                                                * Wikimedia Commons
                            * Wikiversity
                    

### Print/export

                    
                                                * Create a book
                            * Download as PDF
                            * Printable version
                    

### Languages

                    
                                                * العربية
                            * Català
                            * Cymraeg
                            * Dansk
                            * Deutsch
                            * Eesti
                            * Español
                            * Esperanto
                            * فارسی
                            * Français
                            * Italiano
                            * Latviešu
                            * Lietuvių
                            * Magyar
                            * Bahasa Melayu
                            * Nederlands
                            * 日本語
                            * Norsk
                            * Norsk nynorsk
                            * Polski
                            * Português
                            * Русский
                            * Simple English
                            * Suomi
                            * Svenska
                            * தமிழ்
                            * Türkçe
                    

Edit links

                    
                                                * This page was last edited on 1 June 2019, at 11:11 (UTC).
                            * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                            * Privacy policy
                            * About Wikipedia
                            * Disclaimers
                            * Contact Wikipedia
                            * Developers
                            * Cookie statement
                            * Mobile view
                            * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                            * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

