
                    
                                                * Home
                            * Mendocino Energy
                            * SWEEP
                            * Kent State Truth Tribunal
                            * # Mendo Coast Current
                    

## On Truth at Kent State & Safe Renewable Energy Solutions

**Feeds:**

                    
                                        Posts
                    Comments
                    

## Posts Tagged 'Solar PV'

## NextLight Inks Solar Energy Deal with PG&E

Posted in Arizona, Bay Area, California, CPUC, Economic Issues, Electricity
Generation, Funding, News, Northern California, Renewable Energy, Solar
Energy, Solar Farm, Solar Power Plant, Solar PV, Solar Thermal, Southern
California, U.S., tagged Agua Caliente, Antelope Valley, Arizona, AV Solar
Ranch, California, Energy Capital Partners, First Solar, Frank De Rosa,
Funding, NextLight, NextLight Renewable Power, OptiSolar, PG&E, Renewable
Energy, Solar Energy, Solar Panels, Solar Power Plant, Solar PV, Solar
Thermal, Southern California, SunEdison, SunPower, U.S. on June 9, 2009| Leave
a Comment »

UCILLA WANG, The Greentech Innovations Report, June 9, 2009

![sunpower](https://mendocoastcurrent.files.wordpress.com/2009/06/sunpower13.png?w=300&h=186)When
Pacific Gas and Electric Co. announced a deal to buy solar power from a
proposed 230-megawatt project last Friday, it shone a spotlight on a two-year-
old company with a different business model than many startups who have inked
similar deals with the utility.

The deal also raised the question: Who is NextLight?

NextLight Renewable Power, based in San Francisco, wants to be purely a power
plant developer and owner. The deal with PG&E is the first power purchase
agreement for the startup, which is funded by private equity firm Energy
Capital Partners, said Jim Woodruff, vice president of regulatory and
government affairs, in an interview Monday.

"We think the tech agnostic approach is a winning business model," Woodruff
said. "All the core skills that are necessary to develop power projects are
the same" for solar or other types of power plants.

The company boasts managers who have experience developing power plants and
transmission projects as well as negotiating renewable power purchases.

NextLight's CEO, Frank De Rosa, worked for PG&E for 23 years and held various
roles at the utility, including the director of renewable energy supply,
before founding NextLight in 2007. Woodruff worked for Southern California
Edison for more than 10 years, first as an in-house counsel and later as the
manager of regulatory and legislative issues for the utility's alternative
power business.

NextLight has been developing other solar power projects on public and private
land in western states, including a plan to install up to 150 megawatts of
generation capacity in Boulder City, Nevada.

The Boulder City Council is slated to vote on whether to lease 1,100 acres of
city land to NextLight tonight. The company would sell 3,000-megawatt hours of
energy per year to the city if the project is built, Woodruff said.

PG&E signed the deal with NextLight after it had inked many power purchase
agreements in recent years to buy solar power from startup companies with the
ambition to both develop their own technologies as well as owning and
operating solar farms.

Some of the projects seem to be moving along. A few have hit snags. The deal
to buy power from Finavera, an ocean power developer in Canada, fell apart
last year when the California Public Utilities Commission decided that the
contract would be too costly to ratepayers (see California Rejects PG&E
Contract for Wave Energy).

OptiSolar, which was supposed to build a 550-megawatt solar farm to sell power
to PG&E, couldn't raise enough money to operate its solar panel factory and
develop solar farms.

First Solar, another solar panel maker based in Tempe, Ariz., bought
OptiSolar's project development business for $400 million in April this year.
First Solar would use its own, cadmium-telluride solar panels, instead of the
amorphous silicon solar panels OptiSolar was developing. PG&E has said that
the power contract would remain in place.

NextLight, on the other hand, would pick different solar technologies instead
of developing its own. The approach isn't new – SunEdison was doing this
before others joined the party.

But there is no guarantee that this approach would enable NextLight to deliver
energy more cheaply, and neither NextLight nor PG&E would discuss the
financial terms of their contract.

"Our priority is about diversification of the resources we use and the
companies we work with," said PG&E spokeswoman Jennifer Zerwer. "Contracting
for renewable via [power purchase agreements] is beneficial because it helps
grow that ecosystem of renewable development, and there is no risk to our
customers."

Rumors have been circulating about whether NextLight would use SunPower's
equipment for the 230-megawatt project, which is called AV Solar Ranch 1,
particularly since the project's website features a photo of SunPower panels.

Woodruff said NextLight hasn't selected a panel supplier. The company and PG&E
have agreed to use solar panels, but the utility wouldn't have a final say on
the supplier, Woodruff added.

Gordon Johnson, head of alternative energy research at Hapoalim Securities,
also cast doubt on the SunPower rumor. "Based on our checks, we do not believe
[SunPower] won the PPA with NextLight," Johnson wrote in a research note.

NextLight plans to start construction of the AV Solar Ranch project in the
third quarter of 2010 and complete it by 2013. The company said it would start
delivering power in 2011.

The project would be located on 2,100 acres in Antelope Valley in Los Angeles
County, Woodruff said. The company bought the property last year for an
undisclosed sum.

The company would need approval from the Los Angeles County to construct the
solar farm. The California Public Utilities Commission would need to approve
the power purchase contract between PG&E and NextLight.

NextLight also is developing a power project with up to 425 megawatts in
generation capacity in southern Arizona. The company is negotiating to a
farmland for the Agua Caliente Solar Project, Woodruff said. The 3,800 acres
are located east of the city of Yuma.

The company is negotiating with a utility to buy power from Agua Caliente,
said Woodruff, who declined to name the utility.

NextLight hasn't decided whether to install solar panels or build a solar
thermal power plant for the Agua Caliente project. Solar thermal power plants
use mirrors to concentrate the sunlight for heating water or mineral oils to
generate steam. The steam is then piped to run electricity-generating
turbines.

But solar panels appear to be a more attractive option than solar thermal for
now, Woodruff said.

"We've concluded that, in the near term, PV is more cost effective," he said.

Advertisements

Read Full Post »

## Toyota Developing Solar Powered Car

Posted in Electric Cars, Electricity Generation, Japan, News, Renewable
Energy, Research, Solar Energy, Solar Powered Car, tagged Electric Cars,
Electricity Generation, Japan, Renewable Energy, Solar Cell, Solar Energy,
Solar Powered Car, Solar PV, Toyota on January 1, 2009| 5 Comments »

MendoCoastCurrent, January 1, 2009

![Here's a possibility...prius with solar

panels](https://mendocoastcurrent.files.wordpress.com/2009/01/toyota_prius_with_solar_panels.jpg?w=300&h=197)

Here's a possibility...prius with solar panels

Toyota Motor is developing a vehicle that will be powered solely by solar
energy in an effort to turn around its struggling business with a futuristic
ecological car, a top Japanese business daily reported.

The Nikkei newspaper, however, said it will be years before the planned
vehicle will be available on the market. Toyota's offices were closed Thursday
and officials were not immediately available for comment.

Toyota is working on an electric vehicle that will get power from solar cells
equipped on the vehicle, and that can be recharged with electricity generated
from solar panels on the roofs of homes. The automaker later hopes to develop
a model totally powered by solar cells on the vehicle.

In December, Toyota stunned the nation by announcing it will slip into its
first operating loss in 70 years, as it gets battered by a global slump,
especially in the key U.S. market. The surging yen has also hurt the earnings
of Japanese automakers.

Still, Toyota is a leader in green technology and executives have stressed
they won't cut back on environmental research despite its troubles.

Toyota, the manufacturer of the Lexus luxury car and Camry sedan, has already
begun using solar panels at its Tsutsumi plant in central Japan to produce
some of its own electricity.

Read Full Post »

## Californians Filing Solar Rebate & Subsidy Applications Up Despite

Recession

Posted in California, CPUC, Green Recovery, Issue, News, Renewable Energy,
Rooftop Solar, Small Solar, Solar Energy, Solar PV, U.S., US Energy Policy,
tagged California Solar Initiative, CPUC, Economic Issues, Rooftop Solar,
Solar Energy, Solar PV, Solar Rebates, Solar Subsidies, Solar Tax Breaks, U.S.
on December 30, 2008| Leave a Comment »

MARIA DICKERSON, the Los Angeles Times, December 27, 2008

![7nov07_solar](https://mendocoastcurrent.files.wordpress.com/2008/12/7nov07_solar.jpg?w=500)At
a time when many investors are sticking money in their mattresses,
Californians are putting it on their roofs.

Applications for state rebates to install solar panels hit their highest level
ever in December, one of the few bright spots in an otherwise gloomy economy.

Residents filed a record 1,215 applications seeking solar subsidies this
month, according to the California Public Utilities Commission. That's the
best showing in the program's 24-month history, and December isn't even
finished. More than 18,000 California homeowners and businesses have applied
for rebates over the last two years. Although not everyone who files this
paperwork actually ends up installing solar, the figures are viewed as a
reliable barometer of future demand.

A record 133 megawatts of solar photovoltaics have been installed in
California so far this year, even as the state's economy has stumbled.

Michelle Gerdes of Long Beach just lost her job as a designer for a dinnerware
manufacturer. Her husband, Steve, works for an air-conditioning company whose
business is slowing. But that didn't stop the couple from buying $32,000 worth
of photovoltaic panels that went up on their roof this month. The state rebate
and a federal tax credit will reduce their out-of-pocket costs to about
$17,000 -- a substantial saving but still a big chunk of change. "We decided
to just go for it," said Michelle Gerdes, 44. "It's the right thing to do for
the environment . . . and it will definitely increase the value of our house."

Coming in the midst of a deep recession, continued strong demand for solar has
thrilled -- and puzzled -- officials who oversee the California Solar
Initiative, which seeks to put panels on 1 million roofs in California within
a decade. Consumers nationwide are in a serious spending funk. Even with
California's generous incentives, photovoltaic systems can cost tens of
thousands of dollars.

New federal tax breaks have persuaded some homeowners to take the plunge, said
Molly Sterkel, who manages rooftop solar efforts for the utilities commission.

Others are being enticed by new financing models pioneered in California that
allow them to go solar for little or no money down. Add rising electricity
rates in many parts of the state and turmoil in the financial markets, and
some consumers are concluding that sunshine is their safest investment.

California is by far the nation's leader in rooftop solar, with well over half
the installed capacity.

"In an economic downturn, people are looking for ways to save money on things
that they are going to do anyway," said Nat Kreamer, founder of SunRun Inc., a
San Francisco residential solar energy company. "Electricity is one of those
fundamentals."

Launched in January 2007, the California Solar Initiative is an attempt to
push photovoltaics on a mass scale in California to help cut greenhouse gas
emissions and shore up the state's energy supply.

The goal is 3,000 megawatts installed by 2018, enough to displace five good-
sized power plants.

Funded by utility ratepayers across the state, the $3-billion program offers
rebates to Californians who install panels on their homes and businesses.
Incentives vary. But refunds typically range from 20% to 50% of a system's
cost.

The incentives are structured to decline over time as demand grows, meaning
Californians who act sooner will get the biggest refunds.

Rooftop solar will get even more attractive in January. Congress recently
expanded federal investment tax credits for residential solar arrays. Starting
next year, homeowners will be eligible for tax breaks of up to 30% of the
entire cost of their projects. Those benefits had previously been capped at
$2,000 per system.

"That has really spurred the market," said Lyndon Rive, chief executive of
SolarCity, a Foster City, Calif.-based solar installer. "Our cash sales have
increased dramatically."

For consumers who still can't afford to purchase, SolarCity has a residential
leasing option. It lets them put solar on their roofs without the hefty
upfront costs. Customers cut their power bills while the rebates and tax
credits flow to SolarCity, which maintains ownership of the panels.

The deal has proved so popular that it has turned SolarCity into the state's
largest installer of residential rooftop photovoltaics.

Kreamer's SunRun offers a similar program known as a power purchase agreement.
His company installs, maintains and owns the systems. Homeowners sign a long-
term contract with SunRun for solar energy that's priced below what they pay
for conventional power.

Californians pay some of the highest electricity rates in the country. Rates
in many parts of the state are rising.

The Gerdeses' utility, Southern California Edison, is asking state regulators
to allow it to collect more than $700 million extra from its ratepayers next
year.

It won't be coming from the Gerdeses. With solar panels now snug on their
roof, the couple needn't worry about rising electricity bills as the recession
deepens.

"We can think about turning the hot tub back on now," Michelle Gerdes said.

Read Full Post »

## PG&E Signs Solar PV Contract with El Dorado Energy

Posted in California, Nevada, News, Solar Energy, Solar PV, U.S., tagged
California, El Dorado Energy, Nevada, PG&E, Sempra Generation, Solar Energy,
Solar PV, U.S. on December 26, 2008| Leave a Comment »

MendoCoastCurrent, December 22, 2008

![solar_184x138](https://mendocoastcurrent.files.wordpress.com/2008/12/solar_184x138.jpg?w=500)Pacific
Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) announced today that it has entered into a
long-term agreement with El Dorado Energy, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Sempra Generation, to purchase 10 megawatts of renewable, photovoltaic solar
energy from Sempra Generation’s new El Dorado Energy Solar facility in Nevada.

“Solar energy is a reliable and environmentally-friendly way to help meet
California’s peak energy demands,” said Jack Keenan, chief operating officer
for PG&E. “Through our partnership with Sempra Generation, we will
significantly increase the amount of solar energy we provide to our customers
in 2009.”

The El Dorado Energy solar facility is located on 80 acres adjacent to Sempra
Generation’s existing gas-fired power plant in Boulder City, Nevada. Power
deliveries to PG&E are expected to begin by January 1, 2009. The project will
generate up to 23.2 gigawatt-hours of renewable energy annually. That is
equivalent to the amount of energy needed to serve more than 3,360 residential
homes annually.

”We commend Pacific Gas and Electric Company and its decision to encourage and
sustain new renewable energy installations such as El Dorado Energy Solar,”
said Michael W. Allman, president and chief executive officer of Sempra
Generation. “Our mutual, long-term commitment to solar energy will benefit
western U.S. power customers for generations to come.”

Since 2002, PG&E has entered into contracts for more than 20% of its future
electric power deliveries from renewable sources. On average, more than 50% of
the electricity PG&E delivers to its customers comes from generating sources
that emit no carbon dioxide, making the company’s energy among the cleanest in
the nation.

Pacific Gas and Electric Company, a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, is one of
the largest combined natural gas and electric utilities in the United States.
Based in San Francisco, with 20,000 employees, the company delivers some of
the nation’s cleanest energy to 15 million people in northern and central
California.

Read Full Post »

## California SB7 Encourages Small Solar

Posted in California, News, Renewable Energy, Small Solar, Solar Energy, Solar
Farm, Solar PV, U.S., US Energy Policy, tagged California, Northern
California, Renewable Energy, SB7, Senator Patricia Wiggins, Small Solar,
Solar Credits, Solar Energy, Solar PV, U.S., US Energy Policy on December 19,
2008| Leave a Comment »

Redwood Times, December 17, 2008

![cudrefin_switzerlandashx](https://mendocoastcurrent.files.wordpress.com/2008/12/cudrefin_switzerlandashx.jpeg?w=300&h=203)California
State Senator Patricia Wiggins has introduced new legislation to encourage
more production of solar power by compensating smaller producers for all of
the solar power that they generate.

Currently, residential electric customers can participate in the state’s solar
program, known as the California Solar Initiative, and receive subsidies for
the installation of photovoltaic panels to produce solar power. They may also
participate in “net-energy metering,” a program that gives customers credits
for the amount of solar power they produce against their electric bills.
However, power produced beyond their own use is returned to their electric
provider for free.

SB 7 would not only allow residential utility customers to continue to receive
credits for the solar power they produce for their own use, it would also
allow them to contribute more solar-based power to the electrical grid and be
compensated for it at the same rate a utility provider would pay.

The state already has legislation to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by
getting 33% of its power from renewable sources.

SB7 "offers a fair and reasonable path to increased production of solar power,
and it contributes a win-win for solar power producers, utility providers and
our environment,” Wiggins said.

Read Full Post »

## Aggressive French Solar Feed-in Tariff Program Launched

Posted in Electricity Generation, Europe, Event, Feed-in Tariff, France, Green
Economy, News, Solar Energy, Solar PV, tagged Environmental Issues, Feed-in
Tariff, France, Solar Energy, Solar Markets, Solar Photovoltaic, Solar PV,
Wind Energy on November 19, 2008| Leave a Comment »

Wind-Works.org, November 17, 2008

The French Minister for Energy and the Environment announced that the
government was launching an aggressive new program to propel the country to
the forefront of solar energy development.

The announcement by Minister Jean-Louis Borloo was made at the annual Grenelle
meeting of French environmental stakeholders. Minister Borloo outlined 50
actions the Sarkozy government would take to substantially increase the role
of renewable energy in France.

As part of its commitment to the European Union, Borloo said that France will
supply 23% of its energy with renewables by 2020.

Most dramatically, Borloo said that France intends to become one of the
world's leaders in the development of solar photovoltaic technology and will
increase the supply of solar-generated electricity 400 times by 2020.

To do that, France will create a new tariff category for commercial buildings
of €0.45/kWh ($0.57 USD/kWh). This is intended to aid businesses, factories,
and farmers to take profitable advantage of their large rooftops. As a measure
of the government's seriousness, there will be no limit on the size of
commercial rooftop projects that qualify for the tariff. For comparison, the
French commercial tariff for 2009 is higher than that for Germany, the current
world leader in solar PV development.

France has been a solar energy laggard in Europe. By mid 2008 there was only
18 MW of solar PV installed on the mainland. (France still maintains several
overseas territories.) However, changes to the country's system of Advanced
Renewable Tariffs (Tarife Equitable) in 2006 resulted in a flood of new
projects. There is a huge backlog of some 12,000 systems representing 400 MW
that are awaiting connection.

The government attributes the rapid growth to changes made to the tariffs for
solar PV in 2006 when the government doubled the base feed-in tariff from
€0.15 to €0.30 /kWh, the addition of another €0.25 /kWh for façade cladding,
and the inclusion of a 50% tax credit for residential installations.

The residential market accounts for 40% of French installations. The typical
project is about 3 kW.

Even with the backlog, France's development of solar PV is well behind
Germany, Spain, and Italy and Borloo wants to change that.

The objective, Borloo said, is to install 5,400 MW by 2020, an increase of 400
times that of present installations.

There will be no change to the base tariff of €0.30/kWh ($0.38 USD/kWh) for
ground-mounted projects and France continue the €0.55/kWh ($0.70 USD/kWh)
tariff for building integrated systems.

Borloo suggested that France may also apply a feed-in tariff to concentrating
solar power stations.

![](https://i0.wp.com/www.wind-works.org/images/France2009NewPVTariffs.jpg)

These tariffs will remain in effect until 2012 when they will be revisited as
part of the normal review process.

To simplify interconnection of solar PV and reduce future backlogs with the
quasi privatized state utility, Electricité de France, the government will
implement an internet registration process for projects up to 450 kW.

Small solar PV systems less than 3 kW will also be exempted from certain taxes
and fees as well.

Tariffs for wind energy will remain the same, though wind projects will have
to undergo new siting requirements..

Read Full Post »

## New Solar Energy Material Captures Entire Spectrum

Posted in Funding, News, Ohio, Renewable Energy, Research, Solar Energy, Solar
PV, U.S., tagged Funding, MendoCoastCurrent, Ohio, Ohio State University,
Prof. Malcolm Chisholm, Renewable Energy, Research, Solar Energy, Solar
Polymer, Solar PV, U.S. on October 24, 2008| Leave a Comment »

MendoCoastCurrent, October 23, 2008

A new hybrid inorganic/organic material could usher in solar cells that absorb
all solar wavelengths. Researchers have created a new material that overcomes
two of the major obstacles to solar power: it absorbs all the energy contained
in sunlight, and generates electrons in a way that makes them easier to
capture.

Ohio State University chemists and their colleagues combined electrically
conductive plastic with metals including molybdenum and titanium to create the
hybrid material.  
This new material is the first that can absorb all the energy contained in
visible light at once.

The new polymer could also enable much more efficient charge separation since
electrons dislodged by light in the material remain free much longer than in
conventional solar cells used in solar powered battery chargers.

The inorganic/organic hybrid polymer material can be made into polymer blends
that can “absorb essentially across the entire solar spectrum–they go from
about 300 nanometers down to about 10,000 nanometers,” said professor Malcolm
Chisholm of Ohio State University.

Solar materials work by using incident light to boost the energy of electrons,
thereby separating then from the hull of atoms in the material. They can then
be harvested to generate electricity.

However, separated electrons fall back into their host atoms if not collected
quickly. Usually, solar materials either fluoresce (called singlet emisson) or
phosphoresce (triplet emission). The new hybrid material does both, further
increasing potential efficiency.

“The materials we have made show both singlet and triplet emissions,” said
Chisholm. “The singlet state lasts a relatively long time, in the region of
about 10 pico seconds; the triplet lasts a lot longer–up to a 100 or so
microseconds, which should be good for separating the electrons and the hull.”

At this point, the material is years from commercial development, but he added
that this experiment provides a proof of concept — that hybrid solar cell
materials such as this one can offer unusual properties.

The project was funded by the National Science Foundation and Ohio State’s
Institute for Materials Research.

Chisholm is working with Arthur J. Epstein, Distinguished University Professor
of chemistry and physics; Paul Berger, professor of electrical and computer
engineering and physics; and Nitin Padture, professor of materials science and
engineering to develop the material further. That work is part of the Advanced
Materials Initiative, one Ohio State’s Targeted Investment in Excellence (TIE)
programs.

Read Full Post »

Older Posts »

                    
                                                * ## Top Stories
                    
                              * Kent State Massacre at the 46th: What Remains 
                              * Allison's Relic from the Kent State Massacre 
                              * Renewable Energy at Sea: Harnessing Wave Energy 
                              * More on Israeli Company Building Wave Energy Plants in China 
                              * Mendocino Energy 
                              * SWEEP 
                              * Kent State Truth Tribunal 
                              * Terry Norman Remains a Key 'Person of Interest' in the Kent State Massacre 
                              * Nixon's Domino Theory Was Right 
                              * Issues of the Kent State Massacre Going to the U.N. Again 
                            * ## Click on Your Topic
                    

Allison Krause Anti-war Protest Arthur Krause Australia California California
Wildfires Canada Climate Change Dept. of Energy Dept. of the Interior DOE DOI
Economic Issues Electricity Generation Energy Research Environmental Issues
Europe FERC FERC License Finavera Fishermen Fort Bragg Funding Hawaii Humboldt
Iberdrola Kent State Kent State Massacre Kent State Shootings Kent State Truth
Tribunal Laurel Krause May 4 1970 Mendocino Mendocino Lightning Complex
Mendocino Wave Energy MendoCoastCurrent MMS New York Northern California Obama
Ocean Energy OCS Ohio Ohio National Guard OPT Oregon Pelamis PG&E Portugal
President Obama Renewable Energy Scotland Smart Grid Solar Energy Solar
Thermal Spain Student Protest Tidal Energy Tidal Turbines U.S. U.S. Congress
UK United Kingdom US Energy Policy Vietnam War Washington Wave Energy Wave
Energy Blogger Wave Energy Devices Wave Farm Wildfires Wind Energy Wind Farm
Wind Farms Wind Turbines

                    
                                                * ## Fair Use Notice
                    

This blog may contain copyrighted material. Such material is made available
for educational purposes, to advance understanding of human rights, democracy,
scientific, moral, ethical, and social justice issues, ecological rights,
human interaction with nature, etc. This constitutes a ‘fair use’ of any such
copyrighted material as provided for in Title 17 U.S.C. section 107 of the US
Copyright Law. This material is distributed without profit.

                    
                                                * ## Recent Comments
                    
                              * Bonita Behun on 48 Years Later: What Allison Krause Shares
                              * Bonita Behun on Healing An American Wound
                              * Dale Deffer on On May 4, 1970 Allison Krause Had the Nerve to Question Authority
                              * Dan Boswell on On May 4, 1970 Allison Krause Had the Nerve to Question Authority
                              * Tim OConnor on On May 4, 1970 Allison Krause Had the Nerve to Question Authority
                              * RasMichael on On May 4, 1970 Allison Krause Had the Nerve to Question Authority
                              * Mike Abramson on On May 4, 1970 Allison Krause Had the Nerve to Question Authority
                              * Carlos Jones on Allison Beth Krause Lives On
                              * LKBlog on Honoring Allison Krause, a Protester Killed at Kent State
                              * Mike Abramson on Honoring Allison Krause, a Protester Killed at Kent State
                              * LKBlog on Honoring Allison Krause, a Protester Killed at Kent State
                              * Mike Abramson on Honoring Allison Krause, a Protester Killed at Kent State
                              * Tim OConnor on Healing An American Wound
                              * LKBlog on The Aftermath of Loss
                              * Deb E Dee on The Aftermath of Loss
                            * ## Archives
                    

Archives Select Month May 2019 April 2019 March 2019 December 2018 November
2018 May 2018 February 2018 September 2017 May 2017 April 2017 March 2017
October 2016 August 2016 May 2016 January 2016 August 2015 June 2015 May 2015
April 2015 January 2015 October 2014 September 2014 June 2014 March 2014
February 2014 December 2013 October 2013 September 2013 June 2013 May 2013
April 2013 February 2013 September 2012 May 2012 April 2012 January 2012
November 2011 October 2011 September 2011 May 2011 April 2011 March 2011
February 2011 December 2010 November 2010 October 2010 September 2010 August
2010 July 2010 June 2010 May 2010 April 2010 March 2010 February 2010 January
2010 December 2009 November 2009 October 2009 September 2009 August 2009 July
2009 June 2009 May 2009 April 2009 March 2009 February 2009 January 2009
December 2008 November 2008 October 2008 September 2008 August 2008 July 2008
June 2008 May 2008 April 2008 March 2008 February 2008 January 2008 December
2007 November 2007 October 2007 September 2007

                    
                                                * ## Meta
                    
                              * Register
                              * Log in
                              * Entries RSS
                              * Comments RSS
                              * WordPress.com
                            * ## Click on Your Topic
                    

Allison Krause California Electricity Generation Energy Research Environmental
Issues FERC Fort Bragg Funding Hydrokinetic Energy Issue Kent State Massacre
Kent State Truth Tribunal Marine Energy Mendocino Mendocino Coast Current News
Obama Ocean Energy President Obama Renewable Energy Research Solar Energy U.S.
United Kingdom US Energy Policy Vietnam War Wave Energy Wave Energy Trials
Wind Energy Wind Farm

                    
                                                * Search for:
                    

Advertisements

Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com.

WPThemes.

Mendo Coast Current

Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com.

Post to

Cancel

Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website,
you agree to their use.  
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here: Cookie Policy

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

