

* * *

Log In Sign Up

Learning Library __

Popular

                    
                                                * Printable worksheets
                            * Math
                            * Reading
                            * Science
                            * Social studies
                            * Writing
                            * Create your own
                            * Grades P-5th __
                    

Preschool Kindergarten 1st grade 2nd grade 3rd grade 4th grade 5th grade

                    
                                                * Online games
                            * Math
                            * Reading
                            * Grades P-5th __
                    

Preschool Kindergarten 1st grade 2nd grade 3rd grade 4th grade 5th grade

                    
                                                * Lesson plans
                            * Math
                            * Reading
                            * Writing
                            * Grades P-5th __
                    

Preschool Kindergarten 1st grade 2nd grade 3rd grade 4th grade 5th grade

Subjects

                    
                                                * Fine arts
                            * Foreign languages
                            * Math
                            * Reading & writing
                            * Science
                            * Social studies
                    

Trending

                    
                                                * Summer Boost 
                            * Summer Challenge 
                            * EL lesson plans
                    

Resources

                    
                                                * Weekly Boost
                            * Common Core state standards
                            * Skill progression
                    

Content types

Adult-led

                    
                                                * Hands-on activities
                            * Lesson plans
                            * Song videos
                    

Independent

                    
                                                * Guided Lessons __
                            * Progress Tracker __
                            * Interactive stories
                            * Online exercises
                            * Online games
                            * Printable workbooks __
                            * Printable worksheets
                            * See entire Learning Library
                    

Guided Lessons

__

Try Premium

Log In Sign Up

__ premium

                    
                                                * Premium Features
                            * __Progress tracker
                            * __Assignments
                            * __Kid mode
                            * Account settings
                            * Your downloads
                            * Your collections
                            * Notifications
                    
                            * __Recent kid activity
                            * __Your groups
                            * __Your kids
                            * Upgrade to Premium
                            * Sign out
                    

__

### Notifications

Delete all

__

                    
                                                * Grades P-5th: Popular resources for grades P-5th:
                            * Printable worksheets
                            * Worksheets
                            * Online games
                            * Games
                            * Lesson plans
                            * Summer __
                    

Summer Boost Summer Challenge

                    
                                                * __
                    

Summer Boost Summer Challenge

                    
                                                * Preschool
                            * Kindergarten
                            * 1st
                            * 2nd
                            * 3rd
                            * 4th
                            * 5th
                    

__

Open on this device

Launch Kid Mode

Open on student's device

View Instructions

__

back

Here's how students can access Education.com on their devices:

1

Choose which type of app you would like to use.

To use our web app, go to kids.education.com in the web browser (you can
bookmark this URL for future access).

Or download our app "Guided Lessons by Education.com" on your device's app
store.

2

Choose a login method.

Email/Password

or

Student Code

__

Ok, Got it

Entire library

__

Science projects

__

Fifth Grade

__

Science

__

Effects of Chemical Weathering on Rocks

### Science project

# Effects of Chemical Weathering on Rocks

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

(292 ratings )

by Mike Calhoun

Share this science project

![Fifth Grade Science Science projects: Effects of Chemical Weathering on

Rocks](https://cdn.education.com/files/477001_478000/477235/effects-of-

chemical-weathering-on-rocks-350x440.jpg)

**Weathering** is a set of physical, chemical and biological processes that
alter the physical and chemical state of rocks and soil at or near the Earth
's surface. **Chemical weathering** is the process by which rocks are
decomposed, dissolved or loosened by chemical processes to form residual
materials. Chemical reactions break down the bonds holding the rocks together,
causing them to fall apart into smaller and smaller pieces. Weathering causes
**erosion** , the process ofthese rockparticles being carried away and
deposited in other level places.

Chemical weathering is much more common in locations where there is a lot of
water,because water is important to many of the chemical reactions that can
take place. The most common types of chemical weathering are **oxidation** ,
**hydrolysis** and **carbonation**.

Download Project

Grade

Fifth Grade

Subject

ScienceEarth & Space Science

__Thank you for your input.

This science fair project focuses on the carbonation weathering process by
which dissolved carbon dioxide in rainwater or moisture in surrounding air
forms carbonic acid which reacts with the minerals ( **calcium carbonate** )
in some rocks, softeningthem and making it easier for other forces to break
the rocks apart.

Carbonated wateris simply water that has had pressurized carbon dioxide forced
into it. The liquid is usually kept pressurized in its container to prevent
the carbon dioxide from escaping the liquid, but once the pressure is gone
(i.e. the container is opened) the carbon dioxide escapes, causing the liquid
to bubble. Carbonated water is used in soft drinks, club soda, and seltzer
water.

### Problem:

Measure and compare effects of chemical weathering,specifically carbonation,
on several rock samples.

### Materials

                    
                                                * Package of plastic 8 oz drinking glasses or cups
                            * 1-liter bottle of club soda or seltzer water
                            * Masking tape
                            * Clock or watch
                            * 3 fragments of each of the following rock samples: limestone, marble, granite, and sandstone
                    

### Procedure

                    
                                                1. Fill four cups or glasses three-fourths full of carbonated water (club soda or seltzer water).
                            2. Fill the remaining four cups three-fourths full of tape water.
                            3. Place masking tape on the cups and label them: "limestone and tap water," "limestone and carbonated water," "marble and carbonated water," "marble and tap water," "granite and carbonated water," "granite and tap water," "sandstone and carbonated water," and "sandstone and tap water."
                            4. Place the appropriate rock sample fragments into each labeled cup. Set asidea fragment of each type of rock for a control.
                            5. Allow the jars to stand for about a 3-4 days. 
                            6. Remove the rocks from the jars and perform the Mohs Hardness Test(which can be found here) on each, including your control fragments. Were the fragments that had been immersed in carbonated water softer than the others?Record your results.
                    

Author: Mike Calhoun

**Disclaimer and Safety Precautions**

Education.com provides the Science Fair Project Ideas for informational
purposes only. Education.com does not make any guarantee or representation
regarding the Science Fair Project Ideas and is not responsible or liable for
any loss or damage, directly or indirectly, caused by your use of such
information. By accessing the Science Fair Project Ideas, you waive and
renounce any claims against Education.com that arise thereof. In addition,
your access to Education.com's website and Science Fair Project Ideas is
covered by Education.com's Privacy Policy and site Terms of Use, which include
limitations on Education.com's liability.

Warning is hereby given that not all Project Ideas are appropriate for all
individuals or in all circumstances. Implementation of any Science Project
Idea should be undertaken only in appropriate settings and with appropriate
parental or other supervision. Reading and following the safety precautions of
all materials used in a project is the sole responsibility of each individual.
For further information, consult your state's handbook of Science Safety.

### Related learning resources

__

__

Weather Effects

Worksheet

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Weather Effects

What are the effects of storms and other weather events? Students will create
flow charts that represent the multiple effects that are a result of specific
weather causes.

5th grade

Reading & Writing

Worksheet

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Examples of Mechanical Weathering

Science project

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Examples of Mechanical Weathering

Kids learn about examples of mechanical weathering and conduct an experiment
with seeds and plaster in this cool geology science fair project idea.

5th grade

Science

Science project

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Eyeing the Effects of Weather

Lesson plan

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Eyeing the Effects of Weather

What are the effects of weather events?

5th grade

Reading & Writing

Lesson plan

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Effects of Acid Rain on Plant Growth

Science project

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Effects of Acid Rain on Plant Growth

This science fair project idea researches the effects of acid rain on plant
growth.

4th grade

Science

Science project

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

The Effects of Temperature on Bounce

Science project

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

The Effects of Temperature on Bounce

This science fair project idea determines if the temperature of rubber effects
how high it bounces.

4th grade

Science

Science project

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Peace Rocks

Worksheet

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Peace Rocks

Peace rocks are a great way to help students calm down.

4th grade

Worksheet

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Comparing the Effects of Different Events

Worksheet

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Comparing the Effects of Different Events

In this worksheet students will be challenged to compare and contrast the
effects of different weather phenomena.

5th grade

Reading & Writing

Worksheet

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Physical and Chemical Changes

Worksheet

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Physical and Chemical Changes

Teach your little scientist the difference between physical and chemical
changes, on a molecular level.

5th grade

Science

Worksheet

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

The Three Types Of Rocks!

Lesson plan

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

The Three Types Of Rocks!

Teach your students about different types of rocks and how they're formed,
using objects that your class is familiar with.

5th grade

Science

Lesson plan

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Breaking Rocks

Science project

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Breaking Rocks

Science fair project which tests various sedimentary, igneous and metamorphic
rocks to find out whether one rock family is stronger than the others.

4th grade

Science

Science project

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Explaining Environmental Effects

Lesson plan

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Explaining Environmental Effects

In this integrated language arts and science lesson students will explore
causes and effects that specifically relate to environmental impact, including
the effects of human actions.

5th grade

Reading & Writing

Lesson plan

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Chemical Indicators

Science project

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Chemical Indicators

Science fair project that teaches you about chemical indicators and how to
make your own in order to identify various mystery solutions.

4th grade

Science

Science project

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

__

Loading...

__

Loading...

### Log In

Email address

Password

Forgot Password?

Check to enable cookies Learn More

Log In

Not an Education.com member yet? Create an Account

or

Sign in with Facebook

### But first, we have to verify your age!

You have to be 13 or over to proceed. Please verify your age

No, I am not 13 Yes, I am 13 or over

### That's okay!

Just grab an adult to continue.

#### Are you 13 or older? Click here

### Create Account

Sign in with Facebook

OR

Email address

Password

Forgot Password?

Check to enable cookies Learn More

* * *

I want to hear from Education.com! Please send me messages about the following
(select all that apply):

Customer Surveys

Assignment Notifications

Education.com Newsletters

Education.com Seasonal Content, Updates, and Offers

Create Account

Already a member? Log In

By clicking ‘Create Account’ above, I agree that I have read and agree to
Education.com's Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Members receive Education.com emails. You can change email preferences in
account settings.

### Forgot your password?

Please enter your email address and we'll send you instructions to reset your
password. Go back to sign in page

Email address

Has your email changed?

If you no longer have access to the email address associated with your
account, contact Customer Service for help restoring access to your account.

Cancel Send Email

### Reset Password Email Sent

The email is on its way. Please allow a few minutes for it to arrive. Didn't
receive the email? Go back and try again

### Set/Reset Password

New Password

Change Password and Login

__

### Tell us about yourself

#### I am a:

Parent

Teacher

Homeschool

* * *

#### I'm interested in grades:

Pre-K

K

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

* * *

#### School name:

Continue

__

Loading...

### School Information (optional)

Adding your school can help us give you better content recommendations based
on what teachers in your school or district are using in the classroom.

School name

School name

__

Add another school

Cancel Add

This website requires cookies to ensure you get the best experience. Learn
more Allow Cookies

__

### Add to collection

__

Create new collection

__

### Create new collection

Collection name

Save Cancel

__

### New Collection

0

__

__

### New Collection>

0 items

__

### Sign up to start collecting!

Bookmark this to easily find it later. Then send your curated collection to
your children, or put together your own custom lesson plan.

Sign up Log in

Guided Lessons

                    
                                                * Progress Tracker
                            * Classroom Mode
                            * Skills Progression
                    

Learning Library

                    
                                                * Worksheets
                            * Games
                            * Workbooks
                            * Activities
                            * Songs
                            * Stories
                            * Exercises
                    

Teaching Tools

                    
                                                * Lesson Plans
                            * Worksheet Generator
                            * Common Core Resources
                            * More Teaching Tools
                    

Schools

                    
                                                * Get a Quote
                            * Buy School License
                    

Support

                    
                                                * Pricing
                            * Schools
                            * FAQs
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * COPPA Privacy Policy
                            * Terms of Service
                            * Disable Cookies
                    

__

### Disable Cookies

Warning - you are about to disable cookies. If you decide to create an account
with us in the future, you will need to enable cookies before doing so.

Opt Out

About Us

                    
                                                * Company
                            * Careers
                            * Blog
                            * Press
                            * Scholarship Program
                            * Site Map
                            * Contact Us
                    

* * *

Copyright (C) 2006 - 2019 Education.com, Inc. All rights reserved.

__

How likely are you to recommend Education.com to your friends and colleagues?

Not at all likely

Extremely likely

__

What could we do to improve Education.com?

Please note: Use the Contact Us link at the bottom of our website for account-
specific questions or issues.

What would make you love Education.com?

What is your favorite part about Education.com?

Submit Form

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

