

__
![](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%200%200'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![](https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/themes/c2es/resources/img/c2es.png)

                    
                                                * Policy Hub
                            * Climate Solutions
                            * Climate Basics
                            * Our Work
                            * About
                            * Library
                    
                            * Events
                            * Blog
                            * Newsroom
                            * Business Leadership
                            * Contact
                            * Donate
                    
                            * __Follow
                              * Facebook
                              * LinkedIn
                              * Twitter
                              * YouTube
                            * __Share
                            * __Search
                    

__Home

__

#### Policy Hub

                    
                                                * International
                            * US Federal
                            * State
                            * City/Local
                            * Carbon Pricing
                    

#### Climate Solutions

                    
                                                * Business Leadership
                            * Technology Solutions
                            * Resilience Solutions
                            * Solutions Stories
                            * Reducing Your Carbon Footprint
                    

#### Climate Basics

                    
                                                * Climate Science
                            * Climate Impacts
                            * Extreme Weather
                            * Energy/Emissions Data
                            * Climate Classroom
                    

#### Our Work

                    
                                                * Climate Innovation 2050
                            * Business Environmental Leadership Council
                            * Solutions Forum
                            * Carbon Capture Coalition
                            * Mayors/Business Alliance for a Sustainable Future
                            * Climate Resilience
                            * International Dialogue
                            * Climate Leadership Conference and Awards
                    

#### About C2ES

                    
                                                * Board of Directors
                            * Experts and Staff
                            * Annual Reports, Finances, and Management
                            * Support our Work
                              * Celebrating 20 Years of Climate Solutions
                            * Career Opportunities
                            * Privacy Policies
                    

#### Library

                    
                                                * Article
                            * Brief
                            * Chart
                            * Factsheet
                            * Map
                            * Paper
                            * Report
                            * Video
                    

##### Blog » March 10, 2017

__Share

## It's certain: The Earth is getting warmer, and human activity is largely to

blame

#### Authors

##### Ashley Lawson

The case for climate action is having a hard time in Washington these days.
While public officials acknowledge the climate is changing, they’re not
necessarily saying why or what should be done about it.

Let’s clear up a few points.

### **1.** **The Earth is heating up.**

Scientists have measured global temperatures for over a hundred years and see
that the Earth is getting hotter. The trend can be best visualized by
comparing each year’s average temperature with the long-term average. This
figure shows observations of the world’s annual average temperature made by
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). It compares each
year’s temperature to the average over the entire century. Blue bars are years
that were cooler than average and red bars are years that were warmer than
average. In recent decades, the years have always been hotter. If there were
no long-term temperature trend, you would expect a mix of red and blue bars
throughout the record. That’s not what we see.

###

![](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%200%200'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![](https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/uploads/2017/08/global-

land-temp-anomalies-e1507936606279.png)

###### Source

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

### **2. Human activity is largely responsible for this warming.**

Over geologic time, the Earth’s average temperature has changed as a result of
the sun’s output, the tilt and position of the Earth in its orbit, and the
concentration of greenhouse gases. Scientists have developed a good
understanding of the natural variations in these factors by examining
different proxies for ancient temperatures. Observations tell us that these
natural factors have not been changing over the last hundred years or so in a
way that would explain the observed temperature increases.

In contrast, greenhouse gases _have_ been changing in a way that can explain
the observed temperature increases. The pre-eminent record of modern
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations is based at the Scripps
Institute of Oceanography. Researchers there have been sampling pristine air
from a mountaintop in Hawaii every month since 1958 and analyzing its
composition. Their observations show that both the concentration and isotopic
composition of CO2 is changing, and is consistent with manmade sources,
including the carbon emissions from burning fossil fuels.

Moreover, physics tells us how different climate variables will change the
temperature of the atmosphere at different heights. For example, changes in
solar output will heat the atmosphere uniformly, while changes due to
greenhouse gases will warm the surface but cool the higher part of the
atmosphere (the stratosphere).

The National Centers for Environmental Information, run by NOAA, conduct
monthly observations of atmospheric temperatures at different levels. Its
39-year record shows that the temperature change is not uniform. This is
consistent with the effect of greenhouse gases, and inconsistent with other
types of natural effects (e.g., changes in the sun’s output).

### **3.** **The impacts of climate change are growing, and we need to stop

adding to the problem.**

The result of this buildup of greenhouse gases is that we’re trapping heat
within the climate system. The basic physics behind this has been establish
for over 100 years. But climate change isn’t just a matter of the air
temperature being a few degrees warmer.

                    
                                                * Higher levels of CO2 in the atmosphere lead to increased acidity in the oceans, which is damaging to shellfish and other marine life.
                            * Warmer water temperatures and melting of glaciers (due to warmer air temperatures) increase average sea level across the globe.
                            * Climate change is affecting the frequency and intensity of heat waves, heavy rainfall events, and several other types of extreme weather and disasters.
                    

Some observed climate changes are not bad. For example, growing seasons are
lengthening in some parts of the country and costs for winter heating go down
when temperatures are mild. But the overall impacts are estimated to be
negative and costly.

The good news is that we’re making progress, and that we have many of the
tools right now to make a difference, including expanding use of renewable
power; zero-carbon nuclear power, carbon capture, use and storage; energy
efficiency technologies, and electric vehicles. Many businesses, cities, and
states are pursuing clean energy and clean transportation to improve public
health, save money, and create jobs.

The question is not whether climate change is happening, but what we want to
do about it.

### __Related Content

##### Main Greenhouse Gases

Tags ScienceEmissions

View

###### Blog Post

##### Putting a freeze on climate doubt

Kristiane Huber

February 7, 2019

Tags ScienceExtreme Weather

View

##### National Climate Assessment

Tags Science

View

Load More

### __Author(s)

##### Ashley Lawson

##### Follow

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    

##### Sign up for updates

##### Donate to C2ES

Donate Today

![](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%200%200'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![](https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/themes/c2es/resources/img/c2es_white.png)

                    
                                                * Policy Hub
                            * Climate Solutions
                            * Climate Basics
                            * Our Work
                            * About
                            * Library
                    

Designed by
![](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%200%200'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![](https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/themes/c2es/resources/img/h7.png)

✕

__

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

