

### Editions

Africa Australia Canada Canada (français) España France Global Perspectives
Indonesia New Zealand United Kingdom United States

### Sections

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Arts + Culture
                            * Business + Economy
                            * Cities
                            * Education
                            * Environment + Energy
                            * FactCheck
                            * Health + Medicine
                            * Politics + Society
                            * Science + Technology
                    

### Search

### Services

                    
                                                * Events
                            * Job board
                            * Newsletter
                            * Read on Play Newsstand
                            * Read on Apple News
                            * Read on Flipboard
                    

### Information

                    
                                                * Who we are
                            * Our charter
                            * Our team
                            * Our audience
                            * Partners and funders
                            * Republishing guidelines
                            * Contact us
                            * Donate
                            * Friends of The Conversation
                            * Pitching & Writing Masterclass
                            * Privacy policy
                            * Terms and conditions
                            * Corrections
                    

![The Conversation](/assets/logo-en-2d9cbc0ce65fe7de13f8b2030307de62.svg)

                    
                                                * __
                            * Edition:
                    

Available editions

Australia __

                    
                                                * Africa
                            * Canada
                            * Canada (français)
                            * España
                            * France
                            * Global Perspectives
                            * Indonesia
                            * New Zealand
                            * United Kingdom
                            * United States
                            * Job Board
                            * Donate
                            * Become an author
                            * Sign up as a reader
                            * Sign in
                            * __ Get newsletter 
                            * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    

![The Conversation](/assets/logo-en-2d9cbc0ce65fe7de13f8b2030307de62.svg)
Search

__

Academic rigour, journalistic flair

                    
                                                1. Arts  + Culture
                            2. Business + Economy
                            3. Cities
                            4. Education
                            5. Environment + Energy
                            6. FactCheck
                            7. Health + Medicine
                            8. Politics + Society
                            9. Science + Technology
                    

### __Follow Topics

                    
                                                1. National Energy Guarantee
                            2. Marine reserves series
                            3. Australian natural hazards series
                            4. Paris climate agreement
                            5. Sharks
                            6. Great Barrier Reef
                            7. Sustainable shopping
                            8. Beating around the bush
                    

# **Does global warming mean more or less snow?**

January 30, 2015 9.43pm AEDT

____ Kevin Trenberth, _National Center for Atmospheric Research_

### Author

                    
                                                1. ![](/assets/author/width170_default-19ec5bd0b0425d75df0ad1707d18c36b.jpg) Kevin Trenberth
                    

Distinguished Senior Scientist, National Center for Atmospheric Research

### Disclosure statement

Kevin Trenberth receives funding from the Department of Energy and the
National Science Foundation.

### Partners

View all partners

Republish this article

![](/assets/call-to-actions/republish-ca547a7c5135cc6d1a28933dc8b6823c.png)
Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under Creative Commons
licence.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Welcome to Boston - and two feet of snow from one storm. Peter Eimon/Flickr,
CC BY-SA

                    
                                                * __ Email
                            * __ Twitter
                            * __ Facebook
                            * __ LinkedIn
                            * __ WhatsApp
                            * __ Messenger
                    

As first glance, asking whether global warming results in more snow may seem
like a silly question because obviously, if it gets warm enough, there is no
snow. Consequently, deniers of climate change have used recent snow dumps to
cast doubt on a warming climate from human influences. Yet they could not be
more wrong.

To understand the connection, we need to look at what conditions make for the
heaviest snowfalls. Then, we can look at how climate change is affecting those
conditions, especially temperatures in the atmosphere and oceans, during
winters. Studying these factors reveals that there is a higher chance of heavy
snow storms in North America but the length of the snow season is already
shrinking due to global warming.

## Goldilocks temperatures

There is a saying that it can be “too cold to snow”! Of course, this is a myth
but it has a basis in fact because the atmosphere gets freeze dried when it is
very cold. That’s because the amount of moisture the atmosphere can hold
depends very strongly on temperature. Under cold conditions, the snow is
likely to consist of very small crystals and sometimes is very light and
fluffy and like “diamond dust”.

By contrast, the heaviest snowfalls occur with surface temperatures from about
28°F to 32°F – just below the freezing point. Of course, once it gets much
above freezing point, the snow turns to rain. So there is a “Goldilocks” set
of conditions that are just right to result in a super snow storm. And these
conditions are becoming more likely in mid-winter because of human-induced
climate change.

![](https://images.theconversation.com/files/70536/original/image-20150129-22302-1kbnf5v.jpg?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=754&fit=clip)
The first blizzard of 2015 as viewed from space. NOAA/NASA, CC BY

The physics behind this phenomenon is governed by a basic law that tells us
the maximum amount of moisture in the atmosphere increases exponentially with
temperature – that is, the warmer the atmosphere, the more moisture the air
can hold and thus, the more potential for precipitation.

For most conditions at sea level, there’s a rule of thumb that says the
atmosphere can hold 4% more moisture per one degree Fahrenheit increase in
temperature. Some complications come in as the ice phase enters, but we set
those aside for now. That translates into a big difference in moisture across
temperature differences: At 50°F (10°C) the water-holding capacity of air is
double that at 32°F (0°C) and at 14°F (-10°C) the value is only 24% that at
50°F.

## More moisture

In fact, this relationship is fundamental to why it rains (or snows).

When a parcel of air containing water vapor is lifted, it moves into lower
pressure, expands and cools. At some point, it can no longer hold as much
moisture and so the moisture condenses into a cloud and ultimately forms rain
or snow. The lifting of air comes mostly from storms, especially in warm
fronts, as warm air moves over cooler air, or cold fronts, as cold air pushes
under warmer air.

In all storms, the main source of precipitation is the moisture already in the
atmosphere at the start of the storm. This moisture, as water vapor, is
gathered by the storm winds, brought into the storm, concentrated and
precipitated out. Accordingly, if there is more moisture in the environment,
it rains (or snows) harder.

How does this play out when temperatures are below freezing? Temperatures in
the Goldilocks range of between about 28°F and 32°F, accompanied by moisture,
mean more snow: indeed, the amount of snowfall at 32°F would be at least
double that at 14°F. It could be much more because the warm moist buoyant air
may also contribute to intensification of the storm itself.

## Recent winter storms and climate change

Extra-tropical storms in winter form and develop on differences in
temperature, which are greatest between continents and adjacent oceans.

In winter, the cold dry air over North America forms a sharp contrast with the
relatively warm moist air over the Gulf Stream and the North Atlantic. A cold
front leads the southern outbreak of cold air while a warm front leads the
warm moist air heading northwards as it rises upwards and produces
precipitation within the storm.

The environment in which all storms form is now different than it was just 30
or 40 years ago because of global warming. Changes in atmospheric composition
from human activities have increased carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping
greenhouse gases, with carbon dioxide level increasing by over 40% since about
1900 mainly from burning fossil fuels.

The resulting energy imbalance warms our planet. And over 90% of the heat has
gone into the oceans. In addition to higher sea levels - by over 2.5 inches
since 1993 - global sea surface temperatures (SSTs) have risen by 1°F since
about 1970.

![](https://images.theconversation.com/files/70539/original/image-20150129-22314-1q5roiq.png?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=237&fit=clip)
NCEP surface sea temperature anomaly analysis, relative to a climatology from
1981-2010. NOAA

So the memory of global warming is mainly in the oceans. On average the air
above the oceans is warmer by more than 1°F and moister by 5% since the 1970s
from global warming. In the North Atlantic, there has been additional warming
and surface sea temperatures are over 2°F above a 1981-2010 average (which
includes a global warming component) over a huge expanse extending more than
1000 miles from the coast of North America. (see graphic, above). Some of this
extra warmth may have arisen from the absence of much hurricane activity in
the Atlantic this past summer.

In February 5-6, 2010 a snow “bomb” occurred and led to what was referred to
at the time as “Snowmaggedon,” which was used by several conservative Senators
to mock global warming and Al Gore. Yet it was winter and there was plenty of
cold continental air. There was a storm in the right place. And there were
unusually high surface sea temperatures in the subtropical Atlantic Ocean – up
to 3°F (1.5°C) above normal – which led to extraordinary amounts of moisture
being fed into the storm. And it resulted in exceptional snow amounts in the
Washington DC area.

![](https://images.theconversation.com/files/70534/original/image-20150129-22305-9godvj.png?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=754&fit=clip)
NASA/NOAA

Earlier this week, between January 26-28, 2015, the area targeted by the
latest winter storm, called Juno by some, was a bit further north. The
developing storm was in just the right position to tap into the high moisture
over the ocean and develop as it experienced the sharp contrast between the
continent and the relatively warm ocean.

Over three feet of snow fell in some areas, blizzard conditions were
experienced in New England, and heavy seas and erosion occurred in coastal
regions in association with the higher sea levels associated with global
warming.

Going forward, in mid winter, climate change means that snowfalls will
increase because the atmosphere can hold 4% more moisture for every 1°F
increase in temperature. So as long as it does not warm above freezing, the
result is a greater dump of snow.

In contrast, at the beginning and end of winter, it warms enough that it is
more likely to rain, so the total winter snowfall does not increase.
Observations of snow cover for the northern hemisphere indeed show slight
increases in mid-winter (December-February) but huge losses in the spring (see
snow cover figure above.) This is all part of a trend to much heavier
precipitation in the United States (see figure below), especially in the
northeast.

![](https://images.theconversation.com/files/70533/original/image-20150129-22314-1y7u1yt.png?ixlib=rb-1.1.0&q=45&auto=format&w=754&fit=clip)
US National Climate Assessment

Put another way: whether warming causes more or less precipitation varies by
region, but it changes the balance between snow and rain. As long as it stays
below freezing, the snow dumps are bigger, but the snow season shrinks at both
ends of winter. So more time is spent raining: skiers in some regions benefit
in mid-winter but with a shorter ski season.

Because the increased moisture in the storm can also feedback and amplify the
storm itself, the extra snow can easily be order 10% or more from the climate
change component.

See also:

> Kevin Trenberth Trenberth, K. E., 2011: Changes in precipitation with
climate change. Climate Research, 47, 123-138, doi:10.3354/cr00953. [PDF]

>

> There is a sharp increase in one-day precipitation extremes during the
October to March cold season.

>

> National Climate Assessment data say the same thing.

__

                    
                                                * Climate change
                            * Snow
                    
                            * __ Tweet
                            * __ Share
                            * __ Get newsletter Newsletter
                    

### You might also like

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
Tens of thousands of students march in Sydney, Australia in March 2019 to
demand action on climate change. (Shutterstock)

## Language matters when the Earth is in the midst of a climate crisis

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
SolarGIS 2011

## Solar panels all over the Sahara desert? – Imagine newsletter #2

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
High tide at Nukatoa Island, in the Takuu Atoll, Papua New Guinea. Richard
Moyle

## Understanding the human side of climate change relocation

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
A western ground parrot being released with a GPS tracker fitted. Alan Danks

## How we’re helping the western ground parrot survive climate change

### Most popular on The Conversation

                    
                                                * Explaining Adani: why would a billionaire persist with a mine that will probably lose money?
                            * Are you burnt out at work? Ask yourself these 4 questions
                            * The Reserve Bank will cut rates again and again, until we lift spending and push up prices
                            * Why the raids on Australian media present a clear threat to democracy
                            * ‘Do I need to shave my pubic hair before having sex?’
                            * There are four types of drinker – which one are you?
                            * View from The Hill: Kristina Keneally vs Peter Dutton should produce plenty of political bloodsport
                            * Grattan on Friday: Is it good for Labor, or Bill Shorten, for the former leader to stay in parliament?
                            * Coalition likely to have strong Senate position as their Senate vote jumps 3%
                            * Health Check: what’s the best way to sit?
                    

### Events

                    
                                                * Your Leadership Voice - Women In Focus (Classic)  -- Caulfield East , Victoria
                    
                            * Your Leadership Voice: Women in Focus -- Caulfield, Victoria
                    
                            * Sydney Ideas: Why should the perfect robot look and think just like a human? -- Sydney, New South Wales
                    
                            * Getting the work of government done: thinking differently about commissioning and contracting -- Melbourne, Victoria
                    
                            * What will be the new government’s vision for higher education?  -- Parkville, Victoria
                    

__ More events

### Jobs

                    
                                                * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/64/logos/width36_logo-1435284135.jpg)
                    

##### Lecturer/Senior Lecturer in Medical Imaging Sciences

                    
                                                * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/2/logos/width36_logo-1501461860.png)
                    

##### Research Fellow, Computer Science

                    
                                                * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/61/logos/width36_logo-1381376036.png)
                    

##### Research Officer Capr

                    
                                                * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/1/logos/width36_logo-1520549009.png)
                    

##### Research Fellow In Water Resources Modelling And Management

                    
                                                * ![](https://tc-jobs-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/organisations/6/logos/width36_logo-1431665524.jpg)
                    

##### Clinical Operations Manager – Uwa Dental School

__ More jobs

## The Conversation

###### Community

                    
                                                * Community standards
                            * Republishing guidelines
                            * Friends of The Conversation
                            * Research and Expert Database
                            * __Analytics
                            * __Job Board
                            * __Events
                            * __Our feeds
                            * __Donate
                    

###### Company

                    
                                                * Who we are
                            * Our charter
                            * Our team
                            * Our audience
                            * Resource for Teachers
                            * Pitching & Writing Masterclass
                            * Our blog
                            * Partners and funders
                            * Resource for media
                            * Contact us
                            * Work with us
                    

###### Stay informed and subscribe to our free daily newsletter and get the

latest analysis and commentary directly in your inbox.

Email address

_✔_ __![](/assets/spinner-9643e2633c59d728d78b58f465f2fb9c.gif)

###### Follow us on social media

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    

Privacy policy Terms and conditions Corrections

Copyright (C) 2010–2019, The Conversation Media Group Ltd

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

