

Skip to content

Committee on Climate Change

![Committee on Climate Change logo](https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-

content/themes/theccc/img/ccc_logo_2017b.png)

Independent advice to government on building a low-carbon economy and
preparing for climate change

Toggle navigation Menu ![The Committee on Climate Change

logo](https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-

content/themes/theccc/img/ccc_reverse_small_no_text.png)

                    
                                                * Home
                            * About us
                    

About the CommitteeOur impactCareers and vacanciesTransparencyMinutes of
meetings

                    
                                                * Tackling climate change
                    

Why tackle climate change?The science of climate changeReducing carbon
emissionsPreparing for climate change

                    
                                                * News
                    

Latest newsConsultationsComing up

                    
                                                * Publications
                    

All publicationsClimate Change Risk Assessment 2022Climate Change Risk
Assessment 2017

                    
                                                * Blogs
                            * FAQs
                            * Contact us
                    

Search site __Submit

Home > Tackling climate change > The science and impacts of climate change >
What is causing climate change? > A natural climate cycle

What is causing climate change?

                    
                                                * A natural climate cycle
                    

# A natural climate cycle

## **What is causing climate change?**

Geological records stretching back millions of years indicate a number of
large variations in Earth’s climate. These have been caused by many natural
factors, including changes in the sun, volcanoes, Earth’s orbit and CO2
levels.

However, research by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
shows that it is 90% likely that human activity has caused more recent global
warming.

## **Greenhouse gas emissions**

Evidence that CO2 emissions are the cause of global warming is very robust.
Scientists have known since the early 1800s that gases in the atmosphere trap
heat.

Global CO2 emissions from human activity have increased by over 400% since
1950. As a result, the concentration of CO2 in the air has reached more than
400 parts per million by volume (ppm), compared to about 280ppm in pre-
industrial times (pre-1750).

## **The Earth’s natural climate cycle**

Over the last 800,000 years, there have been natural cycles in the Earth's
climate. There have been ice ages and warmer interglacial periods. After the
last ice age 20,000 years ago, average global temperature rose by about 3°C to
8°C, over a period of about 10,000 years.

We can link the rises in temperature over the last 200 years to rises in
atmospheric CO2 levels. Rises in temperature are now well above the natural
cycle of the last 800,000 years.

## **Solar influences**

The sun is the primary source of Earth’s heat, so relatively small changes in
solar output can affect our climate.

Satellite observations since the late 1970s have shown a slight decrease in
the sun’s total energy output. However, instead of cooling, the Earth has
warmed over this period.

Also, warming from the sun would heat all of the atmosphere, including the
lowest few kilometres (the troposphere) and the layer above (the
stratosphere). Observations show that the stratosphere is in fact cooling
while the troposphere warms. This is consistent with greenhouse gas heating
and not solar heating.

**Trends in stratospheric temperature since systematic measurements began,
from eight different datasets.**

## Footer

### Contact us

Committee on Climate Change  
7 Holbein Place,  
London,  
SW1W 8NR

Enquiries: [email protected]

                    
                                                * Copyright, terms and conditions
                            * Privacy and cookies
                            * Freedom of information
                            * Accessibility
                            * Sitemap
                            * Contact us
                    

### Subscribe to our newsletter

See previous editions of our newsletter

Leave this field empty if you're human:

### Follow us

                    
                                                * __Twitter
                            * __Facebook
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

