
                    
                                                * __
                            * Sections __
                            * __
                            * Home
                    

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

                    
                                                * Try 1 month for $1
                            * Username
                            * Sign In
                    

* * *
                    
                                                  * My Post __
                              * My Reading List __
                              * Account Settings __
                              * Newsletters & alerts __
                              * Gift subscriptions __
                              * Contact us __
                              * Help desk __
                    
                            * My Post __
                            * My Reading List __
                            * Account Settings __
                            * Newsletters & alerts __
                            * Gift subscriptions __
                            * Contact us __
                            * Help desk __
                    
                            * Accessibility for screenreader
                    

Politics

# Al Gore has thrived as green-tech investor

![](https://img.washingtonpost.com/rf/image_60w/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2012/10/09/National-

Politics/Images/20832441_H744337.JPG?uuid=vFoh0hGlEeK-gsNBG3aAqQ)  
Former vice president Al Gore speaks at the World Business Forum in New York
in 2010. (Craig Ruttle/BLOOMBERG)

By Carol D. Leonnig

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Carol D. Leonnig

National investigative reporter focused on the White House and government
accountability

Email **Bio __Follow**

October 10, 2012

Before a rapt audience, Al Gore flashed slides on a giant screen bearing the
logos of 11 clean energy companies he predicted could help slow climate
change.

“We can’t wait. . . . We have a planetary emergency,” the former vice
president told industry leaders and scientists at the 2008 conference. “Here
are just a few of the investments that I personally think make sense.”

Today, several of those clean tech firms are thriving, including a solar
energy start-up and a Spanish utility company that has dotted rural America
with hundreds of wind turbines.

Al Gore is thriving, too.

The man who was within sight of the presidency 12 years ago has transformed
himself, becoming perhaps the world’s most renowned crusader on climate change
and a highly successful green-tech investor.

![](https://img.washingtonpost.com/rf/image_60w/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2012/10/11/National-

Politics/Graphics/w-gore_promo.jpg?uuid=8fcyshM_EeKaOR9af2_pRQ) View Graphic

Gore's green investments

Just before leaving public office in 2001, Gore reported assets of less than
$2 million; today, his wealth is estimated at $100 million.

Gore charted this path by returning to his longtime passion — clean energy. He
benefited from a powerful resume and a constellation of friends in the
investment world and in Washington. And four years ago, his portfolio aligned
smoothly with the agenda of an incoming administration and its plan to spend
billions in stimulus funds on alternative energy.

The recovering politician was pushing the right cause at the perfect time.

Fourteen green-tech firms in which Gore invested received or directly
benefited from more than $2.5 billion in loans, grants and tax breaks, part of
President Obama’s historic push to seed a U.S. renewable-energy industry with
public money.

Over the course of his metamorphosis, Gore became an environmentalist hero
with release of his award-winning film and book warning of carbon emissions
dangerously overheating the planet. He founded an investment firm devoted in
part to backing green-minded companies and later partnered with a leading
venture capital firm to invest in clean energy start-ups.

“We have work to do!” Gore recently exhorted an audience while showing his
trademark slide show about melting polar ice caps and the urgent need to stop
burning so much oil and gas.

That declaration, his friends say, captures his obsession — he’s unable to
rest in his self-appointed mission to save the planet.

“Maybe there’s someone as knowledgeable and passionate about climate change. I
just haven’t met that person,” said Orin Kramer, a leading New York hedge fund
manager, friend of Gore and top Democratic campaign bundler. “His schedule is
intensely busy, and my sense is he lives a life that profoundly reflects his
values and passions.”

In building his new career, Gore’s name has become ensnared in a broader
criticism from Republicans, who put him among political allies they say the
Obama administration has unjustly enriched with stimulus and clean-energy
funding.

In last week’s presidential debate, Romney criticized the $90 billion that
went to promote green technology, saying a number of businesses owned by Obama
campaign contributors were winners.

Gore declined to be interviewed, but spokeswoman Betsy McManus said he had not
asked the administration for support for any companies in which he had
invested. “For almost 40 years, he has consistently advocated for the rapid
deployment of renewable energy and other sustainability technologies,” she
said. “His investments are consistent with his beliefs.”

White House officials have rejected charges of favoritism.

“These are merit-based decisions made by professionals with the relevant
policy expertise,” White House spokesman Eric Schultz said.

One of the rare times Gore addressed the questions, at a congressional hearing
in 2009, Republicans had suggested that Obama’s agenda appeared destined to
help him become the nation’s first “carbon billionaire.”

Gore bristled when Rep. Marsha Blackburn (R-Tenn.) asked if he stood to profit
from his investments and political connections.

“I believe that the transition to a green economy is good for our economy and
good for all of us, and I have invested in it,” he said. “And, congresswoman,
if you believe that the reason I have been working on this issue for 30 years
is because of greed, you don’t know me.”

Gore 2.0

Gore, 63, divides most of his time now between his home in Nashville and a St.
Regis tower apartment in San Francisco, where he can visit his West Coast
investment partnership and see his new girlfriend, an environmental activist.
(He and his wife of 40 years, Tipper, separated two years ago. She lives in
the $8.9 million mansion they bought in 2010 outside Santa Barbara.)

His schedule includes international travel as well, often delivering speeches
for fees that have reached as high as $175,000.

It is a huge shift from a decade ago, when Gore was considered a Washington
lifer. The Tennessean was largely raised in the nation’s capital as the son of
a U.S. senator. As his father had hoped, Albert Arnold Gore Jr. went on to
serve in office for 24 years: 16 years in Congress and eight as vice president
under President Bill Clinton.

His loss to George W. Bush in 2000 was personally devastating, and Gore went
into a kind of mourning, friends say.

“The way he coped with the 2000 disaster was to throw himself into this new
work,” said Elaine Kamarck, a former Clinton aide and friend of Gore who was
chief policy adviser on his 2000 campaign. “He just didn’t lick his wounds and
go away.”

Gore eventually turned the painful experience into a punchline. He didn’t miss
a beat when a conference organizer in 2008 confessed it “hurts” to think of
the environmental agenda that could have been, if only Gore had won.

“You have _no_ idea,” he said in a deep baritone of mock grief.

By then, Gore had won a Nobel Prize and Oscar for his 2006 book and movie, “An
Inconvenient Truth.” Supporters had begun hailing him as the single most
effective spokesman on the threat of climate change.

With his prize winnings, Gore created the Alliance for Climate Protection, an
advocacy group that ran ads warning of looming climate change. In the process,
he gained high-placed admirers and business associates in Silicon Valley.

Gore entered the investment world full time by co-founding Generation
Investment Management, a London-based investment firm. He was the type of
high-profile partner sought by Goldman Sachs executive David Blood, who had
headed Goldman’s $325 billion asset management division and was looking to
start a new firm. The pair launched GIM in 2004 to back companies focused on
sustainability, including clean energy, water scarcity and poverty.

GIM also invested in established companies such as Colgate Palmolive and John
Deere, as well as medical technology, Internet and other businesses. Within
three years, the firm was managing $1 billion.

Gore also found himself to be a sought-after star among elite Silicon Valley
investors. In late 2007, he became a senior investment partner at one of the
world’s most successful venture capital firms, Kleiner Perkins. He was
combining forces with longtime friend John Doerr in a joint mission to spur
clean tech.

Doerr had won legendary status at Kleiner by betting early on the meteoric
rise of Internet start-ups Google and Amazon. But by 2007, he had switched his
bets to green energy and vowed to raise $500 million to invest in what he
called the next “mother of all markets.”

Gore and Doerr began comparing notes about start-ups with promise in renewable
energy, including biofuels, advanced batteries and solar.

His friends and colleagues say Gore is relishing his new role and has remarked
that he feels lucky to be doing something he loves and enjoying financial
success.

Kramer, who serves on Gore’s climate change advocacy group, said he has
watched with amazement as Gore debates obscure research with a room full of
scientists.

“He knows the studies they’re citing and the three other studies which shed a
different light on it,” Kramer said.

Washington ties

Eight years after losing the presidential race, with Bush in the final stretch
of his administration, Gore was working hard to build support in Washington
for his cause. By then a rising green investor, he was keenly focused on
shaping policy should a Democrat win in 2008.

Before the election, Gore launched a public campaign known as “Repower
America,” aimed at encouraging the public and the next administration to
support government investments in clean energy. His Alliance for Climate
Protection was running numerous ads, and he delivered speeches laying out his
goal that, within 10 years, 100 percent of the nation’s electricity should
come from clean energy.

“The future of human civilization is at stake,” Gore said in a 2008 speech,
stressing that such projects would create jobs.

At the same time, Gore’s venture partner, Doerr, had been raising money for
Democrats to take back the White House, holding big-check receptions with
Silicon Valley investors. He and fellow Kleiner partners and spouses donated
more than $800,000 to Democrats, much of it for Obama and state efforts to get
out the vote.

At GIM, five of Gore’s principals, including co-founder David Blood, wrote
$130,000 in checks to aid Obama’s bid, according to the Center for Responsive
Politics.

As Obama was preparing to take office, it was clear his public agenda
supporting clean energy aligned with Gore’s personal agenda. Obama held a
highly publicized meeting with Gore at transition headquarters in Chicago to
talk about energy policy. Later, Obama closely echoed several of Gore’s
talking points and his plan for public investment in clean energy. Obama even
adopted Gore’s campaign catchphrase for the effort, “Repower America.”

“This is a matter of urgency and national security,” Obama said. “We have the
opportunity now to create jobs all across this country in all 50 states to
repower America, to redesign how we use energy and . . . make us competitive
for decades to come — even as we save the planet.”

Gore’s orbit extended deeply into the administration, with several former
aides winning senior clean-energy posts. Among them were Carol Browner, a
former Gore political operative who became the president’s climate change
czar, and Ron Klain, Gore’s former chief of staff who went to work for Vice
President Biden overseeing the stimulus.

Those connections were underscored in October 2009, when Jonathan Silver,
under consideration to head the $38 billion ­clean-energy loan program, hosted
a party to help Gore raise money for the Alliance for Climate Protection.

Silver invited the Department of Energy’s chief financial officer, days before
the official was scheduled to meet Silver to discuss the job.

“At the risk of seeming presumptuous, I want to mention that my wife and I are
holding a small event for Al Gore at our home this coming Thursday evening,”
Silver wrote in an e-mail. “I expect there will be about 40 people or so,
generally folks we know who are interested in this issue and have the capacity
to write significant checks and a couple of others with professional
involvement in the topic.”

Help for a portfolio

Gore’s investments coincided with the government’s largest investment in clean
tech. A full 10 percent, estimated at $80 billion to $90 billion, of the 2009
stimulus package was devoted to clean energy.

Like thousands of other companies, those Gore invested in entered the
competition for a piece of the pie. (An administration official said more than
80 percent of applicants the first year were turned away.) Several companies
in Gore’s portfolio emerged as winners. Of the 11 companies he mentioned in
his 2008 slide show, nine received or directly benefited from stimulus or
clean energy funding.

Rep. Fred Upton (R-Mich.), who chairs the Energy and Commerce Committee and is
a leading critic of clean tech funding, said Gore’s portfolio “is reflective
of a disturbing pattern that those closest to the president have been rewarded
with billions of taxpayer dollars . . . and benefited from the
administration’s green bonanza in the rush to spend stimulus cash.”

Department of Energy officials have noted that many of the funds that went to
companies Gore invested in were available to all eligible firms, and some had
won funding from the Bush administration.

“Decisions about the competitively awarded grants and loans were made on the
merits by career civil servants after a careful review of the applications,”
said Dan Leistikow, director of public affairs at the Department of Energy,
which administered the awards.

Gore appeared well-positioned. Generation Investment Management saw its
earnings quadruple from 2008 to 2009, although there is no way to know how
much can be tied to federal support. GIM reported earnings of $51 million in
2009 available to Gore and his nine partners.

But some of the firms in Gore’s portfolio have struggled since winning federal
funds. For others, the money was a major boon.

Iberdrola Renovables, a wind subsidiary largely owned by the Spanish
electricity giant Iberdrola, received $1.5 billion for 20 wind farms it built
across the United States.

The company benefited from a program that had been reshaped by the Obama
transition team to award cash grants to defray construction costs for
renewable energy plants. The grants, available to any eligible builder,
replaced tax credits that had become worthless in the financial crisis. With
early warning from the Obama team, Iberdrola and other developers could time
construction and qualify for the cash for some plants largely built in 2008 —
before Obama took office.

GIM had invested modest amounts in Iberdrola Renovables in early 2008 but
began dramatically increasing its holdings in early 2009, eventually owning
4.2 million shares.

GIM officials declined to comment, citing their policy not to publicly discuss
investment strategies.

Iberdrola spokeswoman Jan Johnson credited the Obama program as a savior that
came “just in time,” helping the company avoid halting construction that was
underway in 2008.

The company now has 40 renewable energy plants operating in the United States,
and its parent is the world’s largest provider of wind energy.

GIM also invested in Johnson Controls, a long-established Milwaukee company
that in August 2009 won the largest award — $299 million — in a $2.4 billion
program Obama had launched to help firms making electric car batteries.

Gore’s investment firm had earlier invested modestly in the company, then
ramped up its holdings in late 2008 and held 5.6 million shares by 2009.

The grant to Johnson Controls was meant to help retrofit one plant and build
another. But the company has dramatically scaled back, after executives
concluded demand for electric cars was far lower than the administration
forecast. The factory outfitted with stimulus funds is nearly idle, and plans
to build a second plant have been postponed.

Johnson Controls Vice President Alex Molinaroli stressed that the company has
tapped just half of the funds it was awarded. He said the program helped build
the foundation for a U.S. electric battery industry that could compete
internationally when demand picks up.

“We’ll have to wait a long time to see if this was a good investment or not,”
Molinaroli told the Post in 2011.

The company’s decision to pull back, however, will not affect GIM’s portfolio.
When the investment firm doubled its holdings, shares were as low as $9; GIM
sold them from April to December 2009, with prices running from $21 to $26.

Gore’s support for companies that also won federal funds is a natural
alignment of interests, his friends and partners said. Gore chose to invest in
firms with promising technologies, they said, and it makes sense that the
administration would choose some of the same firms in hopes of backing
successful companies.

“Is he better than average” at picking the best companies, Kamarck asked. “Of
course he is. Why is that a surprise? He’s spent his life studying this
sector.”

Alice Crites contributed to this article.

Most Read Politics

                    
                                                * 1
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

‘These boys were on a holiday’: Trump family members promote themselves, and
businesses, on European trip

                    
                                                * 2
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Analysis More Americans were shot to death by March 6 this year than died on
D-Day

                    
                                                * 3
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Joe Biden reverses position on federal funding of abortion after Democratic
outcry

                    
                                                * 4
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

A wealthy Iraqi sheikh who urges a hard-line U.S. approach to Iran spent 26
nights at Trump’s D.C. hotel

                    
                                                * 5
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

House likely to hold William Barr, Wilbur Ross in contempt after subpoena
demands are rejected

                    
                                                * __
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Opinion Trump is destroying three decades of hard work with Mexico

                    
                                                * __
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Opinion Forget impeachment. Tee up prosecution.

![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

Subscriber sign in

### We noticed you’re blocking ads!

Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a
subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

Try 1 month for $1

Unblock ads

Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

