

Skip to content

Close the search form A button that allows you to close the search form if
needed Close Mobile Menu

# The Nobel Prize The Nobel Prize Logo

Toggle Mobile Menu

                    
                                                * Nobel Prizes & Laureates
                              * Physics Prize
                              * Chemistry Prize
                              * Medicine Prize
                              * Literature Prize
                              * Peace Prize
                              * Prize in Economic Sciences
                              * Quick facts
                            * Nomination
                              * Physics Prize
                              * Chemistry Prize
                              * Medicine Prize
                              * Literature Prize
                              * Peace Prize
                              * Prize in Economic Sciences
                              * Nomination Archive
                            * Alfred Nobel
                              * Alfred Nobel's life
                              * Alfred Nobel's will
                            * News & insights
                            * Events
                              * Public events
                                * Nobel Week Dialogue
                                * Nobel Prize Dialogue
                                * Nobel Prize Series
                                * Nobel Prize Inspiration Initiative
                              * Nobel Prize award ceremonies
                            * Education network
                              * Nobel Prize Lessons
                              * Nobel Prize Teacher Summit
                            * Close the search form A button that allows you to close the search form if needed
                    

Header Search Submit a search term Allows users to submit a search term

The Nobel Peace Prize 2007 More

                    
                                                * Summary 
                            * Prize announcement 
                            * Press release 
                            * Speed read 
                            * Award ceremony video 
                            * Award ceremony speech
                    

### Enhanced Page Navigation

                    
                                                1. The Nobel Peace Prize 2007 
                            2. The Nobel Peace Prize 2007 - Prize announcement 
                            3. The Nobel Peace Prizefor 2007 to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and Albert Arnold (Al) Gore Jr. - Press release
                    

##### The Nobel Peace Prize 2007

                    
                                                * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
                            * Al Gore
                    

###### Share this

                    
                                                * Share on Facebook: The Nobel Peace Prize 2007 Share this content on Facebook Facebook 
                            * Tweet: The Nobel Peace Prize 2007 Share this content on Twitter Twitter 
                            * Share via Email: The Nobel Peace Prize 2007 Share this content via Email Email this page
                    

# The Nobel Peace Prize 2007

![Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change \(IPCC\)

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![Intergovernmental

Panel on Climate Change \(IPCC\)

](https://www.nobelprize.org/images/ipcc-13852-portrait-medium.jpg)

-

### Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)

Prize share: 1/2

![Albert Arnold \(Al\) Gore

Jr.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![Albert

Arnold \(Al\) Gore Jr.](https://www.nobelprize.org/images/gore-15138-portrait-

medium.jpg)

Photo: Ken Opprann

### Albert Arnold (Al) Gore Jr.

Prize share: 1/2

> The Nobel Peace Prize 2007 was awarded jointly to Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) and Albert Arnold (Al) Gore Jr. "for their efforts to
build up and disseminate greater knowledge about man-made climate change, and
to lay the foundations for the measures that are needed to counteract such
change."

To cite this section  
MLA style: The Nobel Peace Prize 2007. NobelPrize.org. Nobel Media AB 2019.
Fri. 7 Jun 2019. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/peace/2007/summary/

Back to top Back To Top Takes users back to the top of the page

### Nobel Prize Lessons

### Martin Luther King, Jr. and the civil rights movement

Martin Luther King Jr.â€™s life and work are a fascinating part of an important
stage of 20th-century history. His ideas extend far beyond his own time and
the society in which he lived.

A new Nobel Prize Lesson is now available and ready to use in the classroom.

![Martin Luther King Jr. marching in

Selma](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![Martin

Luther King Jr. marching in

Selma](https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2019/01/mlk-getty-

images-541224518-496x328.jpg)

### Explore prizes and laureates

Look for popular awards and laureates in different fields, and discover the
history of the Nobel Prize.

Select the category or categories you would like to filter by Physics
Chemistry Medicine Literature Peace Economic Sciences

Select the category or categories you would like to filter by

Physics

Chemistry

Medicine

Literature

Peace

Economic Sciences

Decrease the year by one - Choose a year you would like to search in Increase
the year by one +

Explore

![](https://www.nobelprize.org/wp-

content/themes/nobelprize/assets/images/spinner.gif)

![](https://www.nobelprize.org/wp-

content/themes/nobelprize/assets/images/spinner.gif)

#### About the Nobel Prize organisation

##### The Nobel Foundation

Tasked with a mission to manage Alfred Nobel's fortune and has ultimate
responsibility for fulfilling the intentions of Nobel's will.

##### The prize-awarding institutions

For more than a century, these academic institutions have worked independently
to select Nobel Laureates in each prize category.

##### Nobel Prize outreach activities

Several outreach organisations and activities have been developed to inspire
generations and disseminate knowledge about the Nobel Prize.

                    
                                                * Press
                            * Contact
                            * FAQ
                            * Privacy policy
                            * Technical support
                            * Terms of use
                            * For developers
                            * Media player
                    

###### Join us

                    
                                                * Facebook
                            * Twitter Icon Follow The Nobel Prize on Twitter Twitter
                            * Instagram Icon Follow The Nobel Prize on Instagram Instagram
                            * Youtube Icon Follow The Nobel Prize on Youtube Youtube
                    

# The Nobel Prize

Copyright (C) Nobel Media AB 2019

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

