

__ 1

Desktop notifications are on | Turn off

Get breaking news alerts from The Washington Post

Turn on desktop notifications?

Yes Not now

                    
                                                * __
                            * Sections __
                            * __
                            * Home
                    

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

                    
                                                * Try 1 month for $1
                            * Username
                            * Sign In
                    

* * *
                    
                                                  * My Post __
                              * My Reading List __
                              * Account Settings __
                              * Newsletters & alerts __
                              * Gift subscriptions __
                              * Contact us __
                              * Help desk __
                    
                            * My Post __
                            * My Reading List __
                            * Account Settings __
                            * Newsletters & alerts __
                            * Gift subscriptions __
                            * Contact us __
                            * Help desk __
                    
                            * Accessibility for screenreader
                    

Share Options

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Share via Email

Share on LinkedIn

Share on Pinterest

Share on Tumblr

Comments

Link to homepage

Resize Text

Print Article

Health & Science

# How James Inhofe is upending the nation’s energy and environmental policies

Add to list

In my list

(C-SPAN)

By Juliet Eilperin and

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Juliet Eilperin

Reporter covering domestic policy and national affairs

Email **Bio __Follow**

Brady Dennis

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Brady Dennis

Reporter focusing on environmental policy and public health issues

Email **Bio __Follow**

March 14, 2017

For more than a decade, Sen. James M. Inhofe has raged against the scientific
consensus that humans are fueling climate change, calling it “the greatest
hoax” ever perpetrated on Americans. The Oklahoma Republican has blasted the
Environmental Protection Agency as an “activist organization” that has
unfairly burdened everyone from farmers to fossil-fuel companies.

Now the man critics once dismissed as a political outlier has an unprecedented
opportunity to shape the nation’s energy and ­environmental policies. And he
has helped populate the upper ranks of the agency he has derided with several
of his closest confidants.

At least half a dozen former aides to Inhofe — and counting — have been hired
into top positions at the EPA and the White House. The chief of staff and
deputy chief of staff to EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt, a fellow Oklahoman
and longtime friend of Inhofe, spent years working for the senator. Pruitt’s
senior advisers on air, climate and legal issues are Inhofe alumni. In
addition, two former Inhofe aides have become top domestic and international
energy and environmental advisers to President Trump.

“It gives me a level of comfort to know that we have a bureaucracy that’s
actually going to be serving instead of ruling,” Inhofe said in an interview
this week, describing his former staffers as qualified professionals who will
protect the environment. “They are going to be very realistic. They’re going
to do it in a way that will not be punitive. The previous administration was
almost looking for ways to punish people.”

Comforting is not how many of Inhofe’s longtime opponents would describe the
changes.

(Sarah Parnass/The Washington Post)

“Inhofe was like the original climate-denier in chief. He was one of the first
people spouting this gibberish — fact-free but dangerous gibberish,” said Gene
Karpinski, president of the League of Conservation Voters. “Now he and his
cronies have far more reach and are far more dangerous than they’ve ever been.
. . . That’s good news for the polluters but horrible news for public health.”

Inhofe, 82, has been in the Senate since 1994 and has served as the top
Republican on the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee for 12 out of
the past 14 years. For much of that time, he has been one of the nation’s most
powerful climate-change skeptics, even writing a book in 2012 attacking the
science around global warming, which most of the world has accepted as a
serious and urgent threat.

His most high-profile assault on climate science — one President Barack Obama
mocked multiple times — came on a cold day in February 2015, when he stood on
the Senate floor, fresh snowball in hand, to suggest that Earth could not be
warming in any dangerous way, given the winter weather outside.

Ryan Jackson, Inhofe’s former chief of staff, helps account for part of why so
many of the senator’s aides are now helping guide the administration’s
policymaking. Jackson, who helped shepherd Pruitt’s nomination, then became
the administrator’s chief of staff and started tapping his former colleagues
for top agency posts.

While nearly every federal department has been undergoing major changes since
Trump took office in January, few have seen as rapid and dramatic a shift as
the EPA. It has already scrapped a request for data about methane emissions
that could have paved the way for tighter restrictions on more than 15,000
U.S. oil and gas firms, and Trump has directed the agency to roll back a rule
designed to protect 60 percent of the nation’s water bodies.

On Wednesday, Pruitt is set to announce plans to revisit fuel standards the
Obama administration set for cars and light trucks that will be built five
years from now. And his staff is preparing to unwind the centerpiece of
Obama’s effort to combat climate change — the “Clean Power Plan,” which limits
carbon dioxide emissions from power plants.

‘The Inhofe brigade’

To carry out the changes Trump has promised, namely setting the EPA on a more
minimalist course that will constrain federal authority over the environment,
the new administration has recruited a group of conservative stalwarts who
have spent years working to advance Inhofe’s objectives. At times, some of
them have worked directly for the mining, oil and utility companies that they
are now charged with regulating.

“The Inhofe brigade has landed, secured the beach and is moving inland with
precision as well as speed,” said Stephen Brown, vice president for government
affairs at Tesoro, a major oil refiner.

What exactly will that invasion look like?

Those behind it are, for the most part, not nearly as colorful or outspoken as
their former boss, even as they share many of his views and objectives.

Congressional aides of both parties described Jackson as one of the most soft-
spoken managers on Capitol Hill. Amanda Gunasekara, who will advise the EPA
administrator on air and climate issues, had been working for Inhofe less than
a month when he asked her to hand him a snowball on the Senate floor two years
ago to prove that global warming had not snuffed out winter altogether. Andrew
Wheeler, a front-runner to serve as Pruitt’s No. 2, served the senator for 14
years before going on to lobby for the coal giant Murray Energy, Xcel Energy
and the Nuclear Energy Institute. A few former Inhofe aides — Wheeler, as well
as George Sugiyama and Michael Catanzaro, who is now in the White House — have
worked at the EPA before.

Inhofe and his aides have shown legislative savvy. Even as the senator decried
the Obama administration’s work on carbon dioxide emissions from power plants,
mercury pollution and smog as burdensome for business and possibly illegal,
Inhofe and his staff struck major deals on bipartisan issues including
chemical safety, transportation and water infrastructure.

Joseph Stanko, who heads government relations at the law firm Hunton &
Williams, said the combination of Republicans’ electoral success last year and
the Obama administration’s aggressive use of executive authority has given
conservatives a rare opening.

“It’s a real confluence of there being a philosophical alignment between
Senator Inhofe and the administration, the Republicans holding both branches
of government and there being, for lack of a better word, opportunity created
by the prior overreach,” said Stanko, whose clients include Koch Industries,
Southern Co. and the Electric Reliability Coordinating Council.

‘War’ on environmentalism?

Opponents see the Trump administration and the influx of Inhofe staffers to
the EPA as the early steps in the dismantling of crucial regulations Obama put
in place to combat climate change.

“The EPA was a staunch defender of the environment and supporter of climate
action under the Obama administration,” said Michael Mann, a climate scientist
at Pennsylvania State University. “It is now instead being wielded by the
fossil-fuel interests who are running the Trump administration as just another
weapon in their war on environmental protection and climate action.”

Trump wasn’t Inhofe’s first, or even second, choice for president last year.
Initially, Inhofe endorsed his Senate colleague Marco Rubio (Fla.) in the GOP
primaries, then, after he dropped out, Ohio Gov. John Kasich. But Inhofe then
pivoted to Trump and began forging ties with the campaign through his friend
and fellow senator Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.), advising Trump on defense and
regulatory issues.

The dominance of Inhofe’s staffers reflects not just an ideological shift but
the fact that even an administration of outsiders needs some insiders to help
run the place. Inhofe remains extremely close with his former aides, whom he
teasingly calls “has-beens.”

_[Which Washington Post reporters are covering the agencies you care about? ]_

Pruitt, like Inhofe, is determined to transfer some of the power his agency
has amassed to the states. Earlier this month, a Wall Street Journal columnist
described Pruitt, in a nod to the constitutional bent of the late Justice
Antonin Scalia, as “an EPA originalist.” Privately, according to aides, the
administrator relished the moniker. As Oklahoma attorney general, Pruitt sued
the agency he now heads numerous times, often making the argument that the
Obama administration had overstepped its legal authority.

Pruitt, who caused an uproar last week in a CNBC interview when he questioned
whether carbon dioxide emissions are the primary driver of climate change, has
made it clear he plans to focus the agency on more-traditional pollutants. His
goals include minimizing lead exposure from drinking water — an issue on which
Inhofe joined forces last year with then-Sen. Barbara Boxer (D-Calif.),
despite opposition from House Republicans — and cleaning up contamination in
Super­fund and contaminated industrial sites.

“Finally, we have someone in there that’s not going to be harassing the public
with punitive regulations,” Inhofe said of Pruitt and his former staffers.
“What I want them to do is to do what they are supposed to be doing — be
concerned about the environment, the water, the air. . . . I’d like to see an
EPA there to actually serve people and make life better for them.”

While it will take months to finalize the EPA’s budget for the coming fiscal
year, the White House is contemplating significant reductions that could
complicate Pruitt’s task and gut the agency. Two people briefed on the matter
said the EPA budget proposal could be as low as $5.6 billion, down from the
most recently enacted budget of $8.1 billion, a roughly 30 percent cut. Deep
cuts could prompt unrest among employees, many of whom remain skeptical of the
new administration and its motives, and eliminate staffers Pruitt and his
senior advisers would need to accomplish their priorities.

Those include not just redoing Obama-era rules but possibly reexamining the
way the EPA conducts its scientific assessment of health risks and other
factors that underpin the regulations it issues.

“When I talk to people on the left, they are both happy that all these Inhofe
people are there but also simultaneously scared,” said Dimitri Karakitsos, who
left his post as Inhofe’s senior committee counsel in October to join the firm
Holland & Knight as a partner.

They are relieved, he said, because the new appointees have shown a
willingness to broker compromises on thorny issues. But, Karakitsos added,
“the reason why I think they are scared is because it’s a really smart,
thoughtful group that’s over there,” one that is not going to put out rules
“on a whim that are easily undone.”

A Senate Democratic aide who has worked with many of the former Inhofe
staffers agreed. “These are folks who are very capable. They know the agency
and its programs,” said the staffer, who asked for anonymity to speak frankly.
“They’re smart and hard-working, and they certainly could dismantle the
programs if they were asked to do that. But the question is how they will
react if they’re asked to do that.”

Comments

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Juliet Eilperin Juliet Eilperin is The Washington Post's senior national
affairs correspondent, covering the transformation of federal environmental
policy. She's authored two books, "Demon Fish: Travels Through The Hidden
World of Sharks" and "Fight Club Politics: How Partisanship is Poisoning the
House of Representatives." and has worked for The Post since 1998. Follow __

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Brady Dennis Brady Dennis is a national reporter for The Washington Post,
focusing on the environment and public health issues. He previously spent
years covering the nation’s economy. Dennis was a finalist for the 2009
Pulitzer Prize for a series of explanatory stories about the global financial
crisis. Follow __

__

Sign up for email updates from the "Confronting the Caliphate" series.

You have signed up for the "Confronting the Caliphate" series.

✕

Thank you for signing up

You'll receive e-mail when new stories are published in this series.

Most Read National

                    
                                                * 1
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Surgeons opened her skull to remove a cancerous tumor. Instead, they found a
tapeworm.

                    
                                                * 2
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

‘So much mystery’: After a man died in prison, his body was returned without
vital organs.

                    
                                                * 3
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

No one could open a safe for 40 years. A tourist cracked it on his first try.

                    
                                                * 4
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

A wealthy televangelist explains his fleet of private jets: ‘It’s a biblical
thing’

                    
                                                * 5
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

A 9-year-old’s murder stumped police for 25 years. Her killer may have been
hiding in plain sight.

                    
                                                * __
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Opinion Trump is destroying three decades of hard work with Mexico

                    
                                                * __
                    

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Opinion Forget impeachment. Tee up prosecution.

                    
                                                * **washingtonpost.com**
                            * (C) 1996-2019 The Washington Post
                            *  
                            * Help
                            * Policies and Standards
                            * Terms of Service
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Print Products Terms of Sale
                            * Digital Products Terms of Sale
                            * Submissions and Discussion Policy
                            * RSS Terms of Service
                            * Ad Choices
                            * Contact Us
                    

Read content from allstate

Content from Allstate __ This content is paid for by an advertiser and
published by WP BrandStudio. The Washington Post newsroom was not involved in
the creation of this content. Learn more about WP BrandStudio.

We went to the source. Here’s what matters to millennials.

A state-by-state look at where Generation Y stands on the big issues.

![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

Subscriber sign in

### We noticed you’re blocking ads!

Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a
subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

Try 1 month for $1

Unblock ads

Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

