

# Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

"IPCC" redirects here. For other uses, see IPCC (disambiguation).

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change![Emblem of the United

Nations.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/52/Emblem_of_the_United_Nations.svg/120px-

Emblem_of_the_United_Nations.svg.png)

* * *

![Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Logo.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/10/Intergovernmental_Panel_on_Climate_Change_Logo.svg/200px-

Intergovernmental_Panel_on_Climate_Change_Logo.svg.png)  
Abbreviation| IPCC  
Formation| 1988; 31 years ago (1988)  
Type| Panel  
Legal status| Active  
Headquarters| Geneva, Switzerland

Head

| _Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/09/Flag_of_South_Korea.svg/23px-

Flag_of_South_Korea.svg.png) Hoesung Lee

Parent organization

| World Meteorological Organization  
United Nations Environment Program  
Website| www.ipcc.ch  
![UN emblem

blue.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ee/UN_emblem_blue.svg/16px-

UN_emblem_blue.svg.png) United Nations portal  
![Global Warming

Map.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8c/Global_Warming_Map.jpg/16px-

Global_Warming_Map.jpg) Global warming portal

The **Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change** ( **IPCC** ) is an
intergovernmental body of the United Nations,[1][2] dedicated to providing the
world with an objective, scientific view of climate change, its natural,
political and economic impacts and risks, and possible response options.[3]

It was established in 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and later endorsed by the
United Nations General Assembly. Membership is open to all members of the WMO
and UN.[4] The IPCC produces reports that contribute to the work of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the main
international treaty on climate change.[5][6] The objective of the UNFCCC is
to "stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that
would prevent dangerous anthropogenic (human-induced) interference with the
climate system".[5] The IPCC's Fifth Assessment Report was a critical
scientific input into the UNFCCC's Paris Agreement in 2015.[7]

IPCC reports cover the "scientific, technical and socio-economic information
relevant to understanding the scientific basis of risk of human-induced
climate change, its potential impacts and options for adaptation and
mitigation."[6] The IPCC does not carry out original research, nor does it
monitor climate or related phenomena itself. Rather, it assesses published
literature including peer-reviewed and non-peer-reviewed sources.[8] However,
the IPCC can be said to stimulate research in climate science. Chapters of
IPCC reports often close with sections on limitations and knowledge or
research gaps, and the announcement of an IPCC special report can catalyse
research activity in that area.

Thousands of scientists and other experts contribute on a voluntary basis[9]
to writing and reviewing reports, which are then reviewed by governments. IPCC
reports contain a "Summary for Policymakers", which is subject to line-by-line
approval by delegates from all participating governments. Typically, this
involves the governments of more than 120 countries.[10]

The IPCC provides an internationally accepted authority on climate change,[11]
producing reports which have the agreement of leading climate scientists and
the consensus of participating governments. The 2007 Nobel Peace Prize was
shared, between the IPCC and Al Gore.[12]

Following the election of a new Bureau in 2015, the IPCC embarked on its sixth
assessment cycle. Besides the Sixth Assessment Report, to be completed in
2022, the IPCC released the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C in
October 2018, will release an update to its 2006 Guidelines for National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories—the 2019 Refinement—in May 2019, and will deliver
two further special reports in 2019: the Special Report on the Ocean and
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, and Climate Change and Land. This makes the
sixth assessment cycle the most ambitious in the IPCC's 30-year history.[13]
The IPCC also decided to prepare a special report on cities and climate change
in the seventh assessment cycle, and held a conference in March 2018 to
stimulate research in this area.

## Contents

                    
                                                * 1 Origins and aims
                            * 2 Organization
                            * 3 Assessment reports
                              * 3.1 Scope and preparation of the reports
                              * 3.2 Authors
                              * 3.3 First assessment report
                              * 3.4 Supplementary report of 1992
                              * 3.5 Second assessment report
                              * 3.6 Third assessment report
                                * 3.6.1 Comments on the TAR
                              * 3.7 Fourth assessment report
                                * 3.7.1 Response to AR4
                              * 3.8 Fifth assessment report
                                * 3.8.1 Representative Concentration Pathways
                            * 4 Special reports
                              * 4.1 Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES)
                                * 4.1.1 Comments on the SRES
                              * 4.2 Special report on renewable energy sources and climate change mitigation (SRREN)
                              * 4.3 Special Report on managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate change adaptation (SREX)
                              * 4.4 Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C (SR15)
                            * 5 Methodology reports
                              * 5.1 Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories
                              * 5.2 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories
                            * 6 Activities
                            * 7 Nobel Peace Prize
                            * 8 Criticisms
                              * 8.1 Projected date of melting of Himalayan glaciers
                                * 8.1.1 Overstatement of effects
                              * 8.2 Emphasis of the "hockey stick" graph
                              * 8.3 Conservative nature of IPCC reports
                              * 8.4 IPCC processes
                              * 8.5 Outdatedness of reports
                              * 8.6 Burden on participating scientists
                              * 8.7 Lack of error correction after publication
                              * 8.8 Proposed organizational overhaul
                              * 8.9 Reframing of scientific research
                            * 9 InterAcademy Council review
                            * 10 Archiving
                            * 11 Endorsements of the IPCC
                            * 12 See also
                            * 13 Notes
                            * 14 References
                              * 14.1 Citations
                              * 14.2 Sources
                            * 15 Further reading
                            * 16 External links
                    

## Origins and aims[edit]

The IPCC developed from an international scientific body, the Advisory Group
on Greenhouse Gases set up in 1985 by the International Council of Scientific
Unions, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and the World
Meteorological Organization (WMO) to provide recommendations based on current
research. This small group of scientists lacked the resources to cover the
increasingly complex interdisciplinary nature of climate science. The United
States Environmental Protection Agency and State Department wanted an
international convention to agree restrictions on greenhouse gases, and the
conservative Reagan Administration was concerned about unrestrained influence
from independent scientists or from United Nations bodies including UNEP and
the WMO. The U.S. government was the main force in forming the IPCC as an
autonomous intergovernmental body in which scientists took part both as
experts on the science and as official representatives of their governments,
to produce reports which had the firm backing of all the leading scientists
worldwide researching the topic, and which then had to gain consensus
agreement from every one of the participating governments. In this way, it was
formed as a hybrid between a scientific body and an intergovernmental
political organisation.[3] The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
assesses peer-reviewed scientific literature and other relevant publications
to provide information on the state of knowledge about climate change. It does
not conduct its own original research. It produces comprehensive assessments,
reports on special topics, and methodologies. The assessments build on
previous reports, highlighting the latest knowledge. For example the wording
of the reports from the first to the fifth assessment reflects the growing
evidence for a changing climate caused by human activity.

The IPCC has adopted and published "Principles Governing IPCC Work",[6] which
states that the IPCC will assess:

                    
                                                * the risk of human-induced climate change,
                            * its potential impacts, and
                            * possible options for prevention.
                    

This document also states that IPCC will do this work by assessing "on a
comprehensive, objective, open and transparent basis the scientific, technical
and socio-economic information relevant to understanding the scientific basis"
of these topics. The Principles also state that "IPCC reports should be
neutral with respect to policy, although they may need to deal objectively
with scientific, technical and socio-economic factors relevant to the
application of particular policies." [6]

## Organization[edit]

Korean economist Hoesung Lee has been the chair of the IPCC since 8 October
2015, with the election of the new IPCC Bureau.[14] Before this election, the
IPCC was led by Vice-Chair Ismail El Gizouli, who was designated acting Chair
after the resignation of Rajendra K. Pachauri in February 2015.[15] The
previous chairs were Rajendra K. Pachauri, elected in May 2002; Robert Watson
in 1997; and Bert Bolin in 1988.[16] The chair is assisted by an elected
bureau including vice-chairs and working group co-chairs, and by a
secretariat.

The Panel itself is composed of representatives appointed by governments.
Participation of delegates with appropriate expertise is encouraged. Plenary
sessions of the IPCC and IPCC Working Groups are held at the level of
government representatives. Non-Governmental and Intergovernmental
Organizations admitted as observer organizations[17] may also attend. Sessions
of the Panel, IPCC Bureau, workshops, expert and lead authors meetings are by
invitation only.[6] About 500 people from 130 countries attended the 48th
Session of the Panel in Incheon, Republic of Korea, in October 2018, including
290 government officials and 60 representatives of observer organizations. The
opening ceremonies of sessions of the Panel and of Lead Author Meetings are
open to media, but otherwise IPCC meetings are closed.

There are several major groups:

                    
                                                * IPCC Panel: Meets in plenary session about once a year. It controls the organization's structure, procedures, and work programme, and accepts and approves IPCC reports. The Panel is the IPCC corporate entity.[18]
                            * Chair: Elected by the Panel.
                            * Secretariat: Oversees and manages all activities. Supported by UNEP and WMO.
                            * Bureau: Elected by the Panel. Chaired by the Chair. 34 members include IPCC Vice-Chairs, Co-Chairs of Working Groups and the Task Force, and Vice-Chairs of the Working Groups.[19] It provides guidance to the Panel on the scientific and technical aspects of its work.[20]
                            * Working Groups: Each has two Co-Chairs, one from the developed and one from developing world, and a technical support unit. Sessions of the Working Group approve the Summary for Policymakers of special reports and working group contributions to an assessment report. Each Working Group has a Bureau comprising its Co-Chairs and Vice-Chairs, who are also members of the IPCC Bureau. 
                              * Working Group I: Assesses scientific aspects of the climate system and climate change. Co-Chairs: Valérie Masson-Delmotte and Panmao Zhai[19]
                              * Working Group II: Assesses vulnerability of socio-economic and natural systems to climate change, consequences, and adaptation options. Co-Chairs: Hans-Otto Pörtner and Debra Roberts[19]
                              * Working Group III: Assesses options for limiting greenhouse gas emissions and otherwise mitigating climate change. Co-Chairs: Priyadarshi R. Shukla and Jim Skea[19]
                            * Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.[21] Co-Chairs: Kiyoto Tanabe and Eduardo Calvo Buendía 
                              * Task Force Bureau: Comprises the two Co-Chairs, who are also members of the IPCC Bureau, and 12 members.
                            * Executive Committee: Comprises the Chair, IPCC Vice-Chairs and the Co-Chairs of the Working Groups and Task Force. Its role includes addressing urgent issues that arise between sessions of the Panel.[22]
                    

The IPCC receives funding through the IPCC Trust Fund, established in 1989 by
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO), Costs of the Secretary and of housing the secretariat are
provided by the WMO, while UNEP meets the cost of the Depute Secretary. Annual
cash contributions to the Trust Fund are made by the WMO, by UNEP, and by IPCC
Members. Payments and their size are voluntary. The Panel is responsible for
considering and adopting by consensus the annual budget. The organization is
required to comply with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the WMO.[23]

## Assessment reports[edit]

## IPCC

**Assessment reports:**  
First (1990)  
1992 sup.  
Second (1995)  
Third (2001)  
Fourth (2007)  
Fifth (2014)  
1.5 °C special (2018)  
Sixth (2022)  
UNFCCC | WMO | UNEP

The IPCC has published five comprehensive assessment reports reviewing the
latest climate science,[24] as well as a number of special reports on
particular topics. These reports are prepared by teams of relevant researchers
selected by the Bureau from government nominations. Expert reviewers from a
wide range of governments, IPCC observer organizations and other organizations
are invited at different stages to comment on various aspects of the
drafts.[25]

The IPCC published its First Assessment Report (FAR) in 1990, a supplementary
report in 1992, a Second Assessment Report (SAR) in 1995, a Third Assessment
Report (TAR) in 2001, a Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) in 2007[26] and a Fifth
Assessment Report (AR5) in 2014. The IPCC is currently preparing the Sixth
Assessment Report (AR6), which will be completed in 2022.

Each assessment report is in three volumes, corresponding to Working Groups I,
II, and III. It is completed by a synthesis report that integrates the working
group contributions and any special reports produced in that assessment cycle.

### Scope and preparation of the reports[edit]

The IPCC does not carry out research nor does it monitor climate related data.
Lead authors of IPCC reports assess the available information about climate
change based on published sources.[27] [28] According to IPCC guidelines,
authors should give priority to peer-reviewed sources.[27] Authors may refer
to non-peer-reviewed sources (the "grey literature"), provided that they are
of sufficient quality.[27] Examples of non-peer-reviewed sources include model
results, reports from government agencies and non-governmental organizations,
and industry journals.[8] Each subsequent IPCC report notes areas where the
science has improved since the previous report and also notes areas where
further research is required.

There are generally three stages in the review process:[29]

                    
                                                * Expert review (6–8 weeks)
                            * Government/expert review
                            * Government review of: 
                              * Summaries for Policymakers
                              * Overview Chapters
                              * Synthesis Report
                    

Review comments are in an open archive for at least five years.

There are several types of endorsement which documents receive:

                    
                                                * Approval. Material has been subjected to detailed, line by line discussion and agreement. 
                              * Working Group Summaries for Policymakers are _approved_ by their Working Groups.
                              * Synthesis Report Summary for Policymakers is _approved_ by Panel.
                            * Adoption. Endorsed section by section (and not line by line). 
                              * Panel _adopts_ Overview Chapters of Methodology Reports.
                              * Panel _adopts_ IPCC Synthesis Report.
                            * Acceptance. Not been subject to line by line discussion and agreement, but presents a comprehensive, objective, and balanced view of the subject matter. 
                              * Working Groups _accept_ their reports.
                              * Task Force Reports are _accepted_ by the Panel.
                              * Working Group Summaries for Policymakers are _accepted_ by the Panel after group _approval_.
                    

The Panel is responsible for the IPCC and its endorsement of Reports allows it
to ensure they meet IPCC standards.

There have been a range of commentaries on the IPCC's procedures, examples of
which are discussed later in the article (see also IPCC Summary for
Policymakers). Some of these comments have been supportive,[30] while others
have been critical.[31] Some commentators have suggested changes to the IPCC's
procedures.[32]

### Authors[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-new.svg/50px-

Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" – news **·**
newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( June 2016)_ _(Learn how
and when to remove this template message)_

---|--- 

Each chapter has a number of authors who are responsible for writing and
editing the material. A chapter typically has two "coordinating lead authors",
ten to fifteen "lead authors", and a somewhat larger number of "contributing
authors". The coordinating lead authors are responsible for assembling the
contributions of the other authors, ensuring that they meet stylistic and
formatting requirements, and reporting to the Working Group chairs. Lead
authors are responsible for writing sections of chapters. Contributing authors
prepare text, graphs or data for inclusion by the lead authors.[33]

Authors for the IPCC reports are chosen from a list of researchers prepared by
governments and participating organisations, and by the Working Group/Task
Force Bureaux, as well as other experts known through their published work.
The choice of authors aims for a range of views, expertise and geographical
representation, ensuring representation of experts from developing and
developed countries and countries with economies in transition.

### First assessment report[edit]

Main article: IPCC First Assessment Report

The IPCC First Assessment Report (FAR) was completed in 1990, and served as
the basis of the UNFCCC.

The executive summary of the WG I Summary for Policymakers report says they
are certain that emissions resulting from human activities are substantially
increasing the atmospheric concentrations of the greenhouse gases, resulting
on average in an additional warming of the Earth's surface. They calculate
with confidence that CO2 has been responsible for over half the enhanced
greenhouse effect. They predict that under a "business as usual" (BAU)
scenario, global mean temperature will increase by about 0.3 °C per decade
during the [21st] century. They judge that global mean surface air temperature
has increased by 0.3 to 0.6 °C over the last 100 years, broadly consistent
with prediction of climate models, but also of the same magnitude as natural
climate variability. The unequivocal detection of the enhanced greenhouse
effect is not likely for a decade or more.

### Supplementary report of 1992[edit]

The 1992 supplementary report was an update, requested in the context of the
negotiations on the UNFCCC at the Earth Summit (United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development) in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.

The major conclusion was that research since 1990 did "not affect our
fundamental understanding of the science of the greenhouse effect and either
confirm or do not justify alteration of the major conclusions of the first
IPCC scientific assessment". It noted that transient (time-dependent)
simulations, which had been very preliminary in the FAR, were now improved,
but did not include aerosol or ozone changes.

### Second assessment report[edit]

Main article: IPCC Second Assessment Report

_Climate Change 1995_ , the IPCC Second Assessment Report (SAR), was finished
in 1996. It is split into four parts:

                    
                                                * A synthesis to help interpret UNFCCC article 2.
                            * _The Science of Climate Change_ (WG I)
                            * _Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change_ (WG II)
                            * _Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change_ (WG III)
                    

Each of the last three parts was completed by a separate Working Group (WG),
and each has a Summary for Policymakers (SPM) that represents a consensus of
national representatives. The SPM of the WG I report contains headings:

                    
                                                1. Greenhouse gas concentrations have continued to increase
                            2. Anthropogenic aerosols tend to produce negative radiative forcings
                            3. Climate has changed over the past century (air temperature has increased by between 0.3 and 0.6 °C since the late 19th century; this estimate has not significantly changed since the 1990 report).
                            4. The balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate (considerable progress since the 1990 report in distinguishing between natural and anthropogenic influences on climate, because of: including aerosols; coupled models; pattern-based studies)
                            5. Climate is expected to continue to change in the future (increasing realism of simulations increases confidence; important uncertainties remain but are taken into account in the range of model projections)
                            6. There are still many uncertainties (estimates of future emissions and biogeochemical cycling; models; instrument data for model testing, assessment of variability, and detection studies)
                    

### Third assessment report[edit]

Main article: IPCC Third Assessment Report

The Third Assessment Report (TAR) was completed in 2001 and consists of four
reports, three of them from its Working Groups:

                    
                                                * Working Group I: The Scientific Basis[34]
                            * Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability[35]
                            * Working Group III: Mitigation[36]
                            * Synthesis Report[37]
                    

A number of the TAR's conclusions are given quantitative estimates of how
probable it is that they are correct, e.g., greater than 66% probability of
being correct.[38] These are "Bayesian" probabilities, which are based on an
expert assessment of all the available evidence.[39][40]

"Robust findings" of the TAR Synthesis Report include:

                    
                                                * "Observations show Earth's surface is warming. Globally, 1990s very likely warmest decade in instrumental record".[41] Atmospheric concentrations of anthropogenic (i.e., human-emitted) greenhouse gases have increased substantially.[41]
                            * Since the mid-20th century, most of the observed warming is "likely" (greater than 66% probability, based on expert judgement)[38] due to human activities.[41]
                            * Projections based on the _Special Report on Emissions Scenarios_ suggest warming over the 21st century at a more rapid rate than that experienced for at least the last 10,000 years.[41]
                            * "Projected climate change will have beneficial and adverse effects on both environmental and socio-economic systems, but the larger the changes and the rate of change in climate, the more the adverse effects predominate."[41]
                            * "Ecosystems and species are vulnerable to climate change and other stresses (as illustrated by observed impacts of recent regional temperature changes) and some will be irreversibly damaged or lost."[41]
                            * "Greenhouse gas emission reduction (mitigation) actions would lessen the pressures on natural and human systems from climate change."[41]
                            * "Adaptation [to the effects of climate change] has the potential to reduce adverse effects of climate change and can often produce immediate ancillary benefits, but will not prevent all damages."[41] An example of adaptation to climate change is building levees in response to sea level rise.[42]
                    

#### Comments on the TAR[edit]

In 2001, 16 national science academies issued a joint statement on climate
change.[43] The joint statement was made by the Australian Academy of Science,
the Royal Flemish Academy of Belgium for Science and the Arts, the Brazilian
Academy of Sciences, the Royal Society of Canada, the Caribbean Academy of
Sciences, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the French Academy of Sciences, the
German Academy of Natural Scientists Leopoldina, the Indian National Science
Academy, the Indonesian Academy of Sciences, the Royal Irish Academy,
Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei (Italy), the Academy of Sciences Malaysia, the
Academy Council of the Royal Society of New Zealand, the Royal Swedish Academy
of Sciences, and the Royal Society (UK).[43] The statement, also published as
an editorial in the journal Science, stated "we support the [TAR's] conclusion
that it is at least 90% certain that temperatures will continue to rise, with
average global surface temperature projected to increase by between 1.4 and
5.8 °C above 1990 levels by 2100".[44] The TAR has also been endorsed by the
Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences,[45] Canadian
Meteorological and Oceanographic Society,[46] and European Geosciences
Union[47] (refer to "Endorsements of the IPCC").

In 2001, the US National Research Council (US NRC)[48] produced a report that
assessed Working Group I's (WGI) contribution to the TAR. US NRC (2001)[49]
"generally agrees" with the WGI assessment, and describes the full WGI report
as an "admirable summary of research activities in climate science".[50]

IPCC author Richard Lindzen has made a number of criticisms of the TAR.[51]
Among his criticisms, Lindzen has stated that the WGI Summary for Policymakers
(SPM) does not faithfully summarize the full WGI report.[51] For example,
Lindzen states that the SPM understates the uncertainty associated with
climate models.[51] John Houghton, who was a co-chair of TAR WGI,[52] has
responded to Lindzen's criticisms of the SPM.[53] Houghton has stressed that
the SPM is agreed upon by delegates from many of the world's governments, and
that any changes to the SPM must be supported by scientific evidence.[53]

IPCC author Kevin Trenberth has also commented on the WGI SPM.[54] Trenberth
has stated that during the drafting of the WGI SPM, some government
delegations attempted to "blunt, and perhaps obfuscate, the messages in the
report".[54] However, Trenberth concludes that the SPM is a "reasonably
balanced summary".[54]

US NRC (2001)[55] concluded that the WGI SPM and Technical Summary are
"consistent" with the full WGI report. US NRC (2001)[50] stated:

> [...] the full [WGI] report is adequately summarized in the Technical
Summary. The full WGI report and its Technical Summary are not specifically
directed at policy. The Summary for Policymakers reflects less emphasis on
communicating the basis for uncertainty and a stronger emphasis on areas of
major concern associated with human-induced climate change. This change in
emphasis appears to be the result of a summary process in which scientists
work with policy makers on the document. Written responses from U.S.
coordinating and lead scientific authors to the committee indicate, however,
that (a) no changes were made without the consent of the convening lead
authors (this group represents a fraction of the lead and contributing
authors) and (b) most changes that did occur lacked significant impact.

### Fourth assessment report[edit]

Main article: IPCC Fourth Assessment Report

The Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) was published in 2007.[56] Like previous
assessment reports, it consists of four reports:

                    
                                                * Working Group I: The Physical Science Basis
                            * Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability
                            * Working Group III: Mitigation
                            * Synthesis Report
                    

People from over 130 countries contributed to the IPCC Fourth Assessment
Report, which took 6 years to produce.[56] Contributors to AR4 included more
than 2500 scientific expert reviewers, more than 800 contributing authors, and
more than 450 lead authors.[56]

"Robust findings" of the Synthesis report include:[57]

                    
                                                * "Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of increases in global average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice and rising global average sea level".[58]
                            * Most of the global average warming over the past 50 years is "very likely" (greater than 90% probability, based on expert judgement)[59] due to human activities.[58]
                            * "Impacts [of climate change] will very likely increase due to increased frequencies and intensities of some extreme weather events".[60]
                            * "Anthropogenic warming and sea level rise would continue for centuries even if GHG emissions were to be reduced sufficiently for GHG concentrations to stabilise, due to the time scales associated with climate processes and feedbacks".[60] Stabilization of atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations is discussed in climate change mitigation.
                            * "Some planned adaptation (of human activities) is occurring now; more extensive adaptation is required to reduce vulnerability to climate change".[61]
                            * "Unmitigated climate change would, in the long term, be likely to exceed the capacity of natural, managed and human systems to adapt".[61]
                            * "Many impacts [of climate change] can be reduced, delayed or avoided by mitigation".[61]
                    

Global warming projections from AR4[62] are shown below. The projections apply
to the end of the 21st century (2090–99), relative to temperatures at the end
of the 20th century (1980–99). Add 0.7 °C to projections to make them relative
to pre-industrial levels instead of 1980–99.[63] Descriptions of the
greenhouse gas emissions scenarios can be found in Special Report on Emissions
Scenarios.

AR4 global warming projections[62] Emissions  
scenario | Best estimate  
(°C) | "Likely" range  
(°C)  
---|---|---  
B1 | 1.8 | 1.1 – 2.9  
A1T | 2.4 | 1.4 – 3.8  
B2 | 2.4 | 1.4 – 3.8  
A1B | 2.8 | 1.7 – 4.4  
A2 | 3.4 | 2.0 – 5.4  
A1FI | 4.0 | 2.4 – 6.4

"Likely" means greater than 66% probability of being correct, based on expert
judgement.[59]

#### Response to AR4[edit]

Several science academies have referred to and/or reiterated some of the
conclusions of AR4. These include:

                    
                                                * Joint-statements made in 2007,[64] 2008[65] and 2009[66] by the science academies of Brazil, China, India, Mexico, South Africa and the G8 nations (the "G8+5").
                            * Publications by the Australian Academy of Science.[67]
                            * A joint-statement made in 2007 by the Network of African Science Academies.[68]
                            * A statement made in 2010 by the Inter Academy Medical Panel[69] This statement has been signed by 43 scientific academies.[a]
                    

The Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL, _et al._ , 2009;[70]
2010)[71] has carried out two reviews of AR4. These reviews are generally
supportive of AR4's conclusions.[72][73] PBL (2010)[73] make some
recommendations to improve the IPCC process. A literature assessment by the US
National Research Council (US NRC, 2010)[74] concludes:

> **Climate change is occurring, is caused largely by human activities, and
poses significant risks for—and in many cases is already affecting—a broad
range of human and natural systems** [ _emphasis in original text_ ]. [...]
This conclusion is based on a substantial array of scientific evidence,
including recent work, and is consistent with the conclusions of recent
assessments by the U.S. Global Change Research Program [...], the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Fourth Assessment Report [...],
and other assessments of the state of scientific knowledge on climate change.

Some errors have been found in the IPCC AR4 Working Group II report. Two
errors include the melting of Himalayan glaciers (see later section), and
Dutch land area that is below sea level.[75]

### Fifth assessment report[edit]

Main article: IPCC Fifth Assessment Report

The IPCC's Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) was completed in 2014.[76] AR5
followed the same general format as of AR4, with three Working Group reports
and a Synthesis report.[76] The Working Group I report (WG1) was published in
September 2013.[76]

Conclusions of AR5 are summarized below:

Working Group I

                    
                                                * "Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of the observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia".[77]
                            * "Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide have increased to levels unprecedented in at least the last 800,000 years".[78]
                            * Human influence on the climate system is clear.[79] It is extremely likely (95-100% probability)[80] that human influence was the dominant cause of global warming between 1951-2010.[79]
                    

Working Group II

                    
                                                * "Increasing magnitudes of [global] warming increase the likelihood of severe, pervasive, and irreversible impacts"[81]
                            * "A first step towards adaptation to future climate change is reducing vulnerability and exposure to present climate variability"[82]
                            * "The overall risks of climate change impacts can be reduced by limiting the rate and magnitude of climate change"[81]
                    

Working Group III

                    
                                                * Without new policies to mitigate climate change, projections suggest an increase in global mean temperature in 2100 of 3.7 to 4.8 °C, relative to pre-industrial levels (median values; the range is 2.5 to 7.8 °C including climate uncertainty).[83]
                            * The current trajectory of global greenhouse gas emissions is not consistent with limiting global warming to below 1.5 or 2 °C, relative to pre-industrial levels.[84] Pledges made as part of the Cancún Agreements are broadly consistent with cost-effective scenarios that give a "likely" chance (66-100% probability) of limiting global warming (in 2100) to below 3 °C, relative to pre-industrial levels.[85]
                    

#### Representative Concentration Pathways[edit]

Projections in AR5 are based on "Representative Concentration Pathways"
(RCPs).[86] The RCPs are consistent with a wide range of possible changes in
future anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. Projected changes in global
mean surface temperature and sea level are given in the main RCP article.

## Special reports[edit]

In addition to climate assessment reports, the IPCC publishes Special Reports
on specific topics. The preparation and approval process for all IPCC Special
Reports follows the same procedures as for IPCC Assessment Reports. In the
year 2011 two IPCC Special Report were finalized, the Special Report on
Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation (SRREN) and the Special
Report on Managing Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate
Change Adaptation (SREX). Both Special Reports were requested by
governments.[87]

### Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES)[edit]

The Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) is a report by the IPCC which
was published in 2000.[88] The SRES contains "scenarios" of future changes in
emissions of greenhouse gases and sulfur dioxide.[89] One of the uses of the
SRES scenarios is to project future changes in climate, e.g., changes in
global mean temperature. The SRES scenarios were used in the IPCC's Third[90]
and Fourth Assessment Reports.[91]

The SRES scenarios are "baseline" (or "reference") scenarios, which means that
they do not take into account any current or future measures to limit
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (e.g., the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change).[92] SRES emissions projections are
broadly comparable in range to the baseline projections that have been
developed by the scientific community.[93]

#### Comments on the SRES[edit]

There have been a number of comments on the SRES. Parson _et al._ (2007)[94]
stated that the SRES represented "a substantial advance from prior scenarios".
At the same time, there have been criticisms of the SRES.[95]

The most prominently publicized criticism of SRES focused on the fact that all
but one of the participating models compared gross domestic product (GDP)
across regions using market exchange rates (MER), instead of the more correct
purchasing-power parity (PPP) approach.[96] This criticism is discussed in the
main SRES article.

### Special report on renewable energy sources and climate change mitigation

(SRREN)[edit]

This report assesses existing literature on renewable energy commercialisation
for the mitigation of climate change. It was published in 2012 and covers the
six most important renewable energy technologies, as well as their integration
into present and future energy systems. It also takes into consideration the
environmental and social consequences associated with these technologies, the
cost and strategies to overcome technical as well as non-technical obstacles
to their application and diffusion. The full report in PDF form is found here

More than 130 authors from all over the world contributed to the preparation
of IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change
Mitigation (SRREN) on a voluntary basis – not to mention more than 100
scientists, who served as contributing authors.[87][97]

### Special Report on managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to

advance climate change adaptation (SREX)[edit]

The report was published in 2012. It assesses the effect that climate change
has on the threat of natural disasters and how nations can better manage an
expected change in the frequency of occurrence and intensity of severe weather
patterns. It aims to become a resource for decision-makers to prepare more
effectively for managing the risks of these events. A potentially important
area for consideration is also the detection of trends in extreme events and
the attribution of these trends to human influence. The full report, 594 pages
in length, may be found here in PDF form.

More than 80 authors, 19 review editors, and more than 100 contributing
authors from all over the world contributed to the preparation of
SREX.[87][98]

### Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C (SR15)[edit]

Main article: Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C

When the Paris Agreement was adopted, the UNFCCC invited the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change to write a special report on "How can humanity prevent
the global temperature rise more than 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial
level".[99] The completed report, Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C
(SR15), was released on October 8, 2018. Its full title is "Global Warming of
1.5 °C, an IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of
climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate
poverty".[99]

The finished report summarizes the findings of scientists, showing that
maintaining a temperature rise to below 1.5 °C remains possible, but only
through "rapid and far-reaching transitions in energy, land, urban and
infrastructure..., and industrial systems".[99][100] Meeting the Paris target
of 1.5 °C (2.7 °F) is possible but would require "deep emissions reductions",
"rapid",[100] "far-reaching and unprecedented changes in all aspects of
society".[101] In order to achieve the 1.5 °C target, CO2 emissions must
decline by 45% (relative to 2010 levels) by 2030, reaching net zero by around
2050. Deep reductions in non-CO2 emissions (such as nitrous oxide and methane)
will also be required to limit warming to 1.5 °C. Under the pledges of the
countries entering the Paris Accord, a sharp rise of 3.1 to 3.7 °C is still
expected to occur by 2100. Holding this rise to 1.5 °C avoids the worst
effects of a rise by even 2 °C. However, a warming of even 1.5 degrees will
still result in large-scale drought, famine, heat stress, species die-off,
loss of entire ecosystems, and loss of habitable land, throwing more than 100
Million into poverty. Effects will be most drastic in arid regions including
the Middle East and the Sahel in Africa, where fresh water will remain in some
areas following a 1.5 °C rise in temperatures but are expected to dry up
completely if the rise reaches 2 °C.[102][103][104]

## Methodology reports[edit]

Within IPCC the National Greenhouse Gas Inventory Program develops
methodologies to estimate emissions of greenhouse gases.[105] This has been
undertaken since 1991 by the IPCC WGI in close collaboration with the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the International
Energy Agency. The objectives of the National Greenhouse Gas Inventory Program
are:

                    
                                                * to develop and refine an internationally agreed methodology and software for the calculation and reporting of national greenhouse gas emissions and removals; and
                            * to encourage the widespread use of this methodology by countries participating in the IPCC and by signatories of the UNFCCC.
                    

### Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories[edit]

The 1996 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Investories provide the
methodological basis for the estimation of national greenhouse gas emissions
inventories.[106] Over time these guidelines have been completed with good
practice reports: _Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories_ and _Good Practice Guidance for Land Use,
Land-Use Change and Forestry_.

The 1996 guidelines and the two good practice reports are to be used by
parties to the UNFCCC and to the Kyoto Protocol in their annual submissions of
national greenhouse gas inventories.

### 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories[edit]

![Ambox current

red.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/98/Ambox_current_red.svg/42px-

Ambox_current_red.svg.png)

|

This section needs to be **updated**. Please update this article to reflect
recent events or newly available information. _( March 2019)_

---|--- 

The 2006 _IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories_ is the
latest version of these emission estimation methodologies, including a large
number of default emission factors. [ _clarification needed_ ][107] Although
the IPCC prepared this new version of the guidelines on request of the parties
to the UNFCCC, the methods have not yet been officially accepted for use in
national greenhouse gas emissions reporting under the UNFCCC and the Kyoto
Protocol.[108]

## Activities[edit]

The IPCC concentrates its activities on the tasks allotted to it by the
relevant WMO Executive Council and UNEP Governing Council resolutions and
decisions as well as on actions in support of the UNFCCC process.[6] While the
preparation of the assessment reports is a major IPCC function, it also
supports other activities, such as the Data Distribution Centre[109] and the
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme,[110] required under the UNFCCC.
This involves publishing default emission factors, which are factors used to
derive emissions estimates based on the levels of fuel consumption, industrial
production and so on.

The IPCC also often answers inquiries from the UNFCCC Subsidiary Body for
Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA).

## Nobel Peace Prize[edit]

Main article: 2007 Nobel Peace Prize

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-

logo.svg/38px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png) | Wikisource has original text related
to this article:

**Al Gore's Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech**

---|--- 

In December 2007, the IPCC was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize "for their
efforts to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about man-made climate
change, and to lay the foundations for the measures that are needed to
counteract such change". The award is shared with Former U.S. Vice-President
Al Gore for his work on climate change and the documentary _An Inconvenient
Truth_.[111]

## Criticisms[edit]

There is widespread support for the IPCC in the scientific community, which is
reflected in publications by other scientific bodies[43][64][74] and
experts.[112] However, criticisms of the IPCC have been made.[113]

Since 2010 the IPCC has come under yet unparalleled public and political
scrutiny.[114] The global IPCC consensus approach has been challenged
internally[115][116] and externally with the 2009 Climatic Research Unit email
controversy ("Climategate") an important (but not sole) threshold.[117] It has
been deemed an information monopoly with results for both the quality and the
impact of the IPCC work as such.[115][118]

### Projected date of melting of Himalayan glaciers[edit]

Main article: Criticism of the IPCC AR4

A paragraph in the 2007 Working Group II report ("Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability"), chapter 10 included a projection that Himalayan glaciers
could disappear by 2035

                    
                                        _Glaciers in the Himalaya are receding faster than in any other part of the world (see Table 10.9) and, if the present rate continues, the likelihood of them disappearing by the year 2035 and perhaps sooner is very high if the Earth keeps warming at the current rate. Its total area will likely shrink from the present 500,000 to 100,000 km 2 by the year 2035 (WWF, 2005)._
                    

This projection was not included in the final summary for policymakers. The
IPCC has since acknowledged that the date is incorrect, while reaffirming that
the conclusion in the final summary was robust. They expressed regret for "the
poor application of well-established IPCC procedures in this instance". The
date of 2035 has been correctly quoted by the IPCC from the WWF report, which
has misquoted its own source, an ICSI report "Variations of Snow and Ice in
the past and at present on a Global and Regional Scale".

Rajendra K. Pachauri responded in an interview with _Science_.[119]

#### Overstatement of effects[edit]

Former IPCC chairman Robert Watson said, regarding the Himalayan glaciers
estimation, "The mistakes all appear to have gone in the direction of making
it seem like climate change is more serious by overstating the impact. That is
worrying. The IPCC needs to look at this trend in the errors and ask why it
happened".[120] Martin Parry, a climate expert[121] who had been co-chair of
the IPCC working group II, said that "What began with a single unfortunate
error over Himalayan glaciers has become a clamour without substance" and the
IPCC had investigated the other alleged mistakes, which were "generally
unfounded and also marginal to the assessment".[122]

### Emphasis of the "hockey stick" graph[edit]

Main articles: Hockey stick graph and Hockey stick controversy

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/81/John_Houghton_High_Wycombe_20050226.jpg/220px-

John_Houghton_High_Wycombe_20050226.jpg)

IPCC WG1 Co-chair Sir John T. Houghton showing the IPCC fig. 2.20 hockey stick
graph at a climate conference in 2005

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2d/T_comp_61-90.pdf/page1-220px-

T_comp_61-90.pdf.jpg)

The original northern hemisphere hockey stick graph of Mann, Bradley & Hughes
1999, smoothed curve shown in blue with its uncertainty range in light blue,
overlaid with green dots showing the 30-year global average of the PAGES 2k
Consortium 2013 reconstruction. The red curve shows measured global mean
temperature, according to HadCRUT4 data from 1850 to 2013.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f5/IPCC_1996_SAR_Figure_3.20.png/220px-

IPCC_1996_SAR_Figure_3.20.png)

**Figure 3.20** on p.175 of the IPCC Second Assessment Report.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/be/Ipcc7.1-mann-moberg-

manley.png/220px-Ipcc7.1-mann-moberg-manley.png)

Comparison of MBH99 40-year average from proxy records, as used in IPCC TAR
2001 (blue), with IPCC 1990 schematic Figure 7.1.c (red) [based on Lamb 1965
extrapolating from central England temperatures and other historical records];
central England temperatures to 2007 shown from Jones _et al._ 2009 (green
dashed line).[123] Also shown, Moberg _et al._ 2005 low frequency signal
(black).

The third assessment report (TAR) prominently featured[124] a graph labeled
"Millennial Northern Hemisphere temperature reconstruction" based on a 1999
paper by Michael E. Mann, Raymond S. Bradley and Malcolm K. Hughes (MBH99),
which has been referred to as the "hockey stick graph". This graph extended
the similar graph in Figure 3.20 from the IPCC Second Assessment Report of
1995, and differed from a schematic in the first assessment report that lacked
temperature units, but appeared to depict larger global temperature variations
over the past 1000 years, and higher temperatures during the Medieval Warm
Period than the mid 20th century. The schematic was not an actual plot of
data, and was based on a diagram of temperatures in central England, with
temperatures increased on the basis of documentary evidence of Medieval
vineyards in England. Even with this increase, the maximum it showed for the
Medieval Warm Period did not reach temperatures recorded in central England in
2007.[123] The MBH99 finding was supported by cited reconstructions by Jones
et al. 1998, Pollack, Huang & Shen 1998, Crowley & Lowery 2000 and Briffa
2000, using differing data and methods. The Jones et al. and Briffa
reconstructions were overlaid with the MBH99 reconstruction in Figure 2.21 of
the IPCC report.[125]

These studies were widely presented as demonstrating that the current warming
period is exceptional in comparison to temperatures between 1000 and 1900, and
the MBH99 based graph featured in publicity. Even at the draft stage, this
finding was disputed by contrarians: in May 2000 Fred Singer's Science and
Environmental Policy Project held a press event on Capitol Hill, Washington,
D.C., featuring comments on the graph Wibjörn Karlén and Singer argued against
the graph at a United States Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and
Transportation hearing on 18 July 2000. Contrarian John Lawrence Daly featured
a modified version of the IPCC 1990 schematic, which he mis-identified as
appearing in the IPCC 1995 report, and argued that "Overturning its own
previous view in the 1995 report, the IPCC presented the 'Hockey Stick' as the
new orthodoxy with hardly an apology or explanation for the abrupt U-turn
since its 1995 report".[126] Criticism of the MBH99 reconstruction in a review
paper, which was quickly discredited in the Soon and Baliunas controversy, was
picked up by the Bush administration, and a Senate speech by US Republican
senator James Inhofe alleged that "manmade global warming is the greatest hoax
ever perpetrated on the American people". The data and methodology used to
produce the "hockey stick graph" was criticized in papers by Stephen McIntyre
and Ross McKitrick,[127] and in turn the criticisms in these papers were
examined by other studies and comprehensively refuted by Wahl & Ammann
2007,[128] which showed errors in the methods used by McIntyre and
McKitrick.[129]

On 23 June 2005, Rep. Joe Barton, chairman of the House Committee on Energy
and Commerce wrote joint letters with Ed Whitfield, chairman of the
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations demanding full records on climate
research, as well as personal information about their finances and careers,
from Mann, Bradley and Hughes.[130] Sherwood Boehlert, chairman of the House
Science Committee, said this was a "misguided and illegitimate investigation"
apparently aimed at intimidating scientists, and at his request the U.S.
National Academy of Sciences arranged for its National Research Council to set
up a special investigation.[131] The National Research Council's report agreed
that there were some statistical failings, but these had little effect on the
graph, which was generally correct. In a 2006 letter to _Nature_ , Mann,
Bradley, and Hughes pointed out that their original article had said that
"more widespread high-resolution data are needed before more confident
conclusions can be reached" and that the uncertainties were "the point of the
article".[132]

The IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) published in 2007 featured a graph
showing 12 proxy based temperature reconstructions, including the three
highlighted in the 2001 Third Assessment Report (TAR); Mann, Bradley & Hughes
1999 as before, Jones et al. 1998 and Briffa 2000 had both been calibrated by
newer studies. In addition, analysis of the Medieval Warm Period cited
reconstructions by Crowley & Lowery 2000 (as cited in the TAR) and Osborn &
Briffa 2006. Ten of these 14 reconstructions covered 1,000 years or longer.
Most reconstructions shared some data series, particularly tree ring data, but
newer reconstructions used additional data and covered a wider area, using a
variety of statistical methods. The section discussed the divergence problem
affecting certain tree ring data.[133]

### Conservative nature of IPCC reports[edit]

Some critics have contended that the IPCC reports tend to be conservative by
consistently underestimating the pace and impacts of global warming,[134] and
report only the "lowest common denominator" findings.[135]

On 1 February 2007, the eve of the publication of IPCC's major report on
climate, a study was published suggesting that temperatures and sea levels
have been rising at or above the maximum rates proposed during the last IPCC
report in 2001.[136] The study compared IPCC 2001 projections on temperature
and sea level change with observations. Over the six years studied, the actual
temperature rise was near the top end of the range given by IPCC's 2001
projection, and the actual sea level rise was above the top of the range of
the IPCC projection.

Another example of scientific research which suggests that previous estimates
by the IPCC, far from overstating dangers and risks, have actually understated
them is a study on projected rises in sea levels. When the researchers'
analysis was "applied to the possible scenarios outlined by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the researchers found that
in 2100 sea levels would be 0.5–1.4 m [50–140 cm] above 1990 levels. These
values are much greater than the 9–88 cm as projected by the IPCC itself in
its Third Assessment Report, published in 2001". This may have been due, in
part, to the expanding human understanding of climate.[137][138]

Greg Holland from the National Center for Atmospheric Research, who reviewed a
multi-meter sea level rise study by Jim Hansen, noted “ _There is no doubt
that the sea level rise, within the IPCC, is a very conservative number, so
the truth lies somewhere between IPCC and Jim._ ”[139]

In reporting criticism by some scientists that IPCC's then-impending January
2007 report understates certain risks, particularly sea level rises, an AP
story quoted Stefan Rahmstorf, professor of physics and oceanography at
Potsdam University as saying "In a way, it is one of the strengths of the IPCC
to be very conservative and cautious and not overstate any climate change
risk".[140]

In his December 2006 book, _Hell and High Water: Global Warming_ , and in an
interview on Fox News on 31 January 2007, energy expert Joseph Romm noted that
the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report is already out of date and omits recent
observations and factors contributing to global warming, such as the release
of greenhouse gases from thawing tundra.[141]

Political influence on the IPCC has been documented by the release of a memo
by ExxonMobil to the Bush administration, and its effects on the IPCC's
leadership. The memo led to strong Bush administration lobbying, evidently at
the behest of ExxonMobil, to oust Robert Watson, a climate scientist, from the
IPCC chairmanship, and to have him replaced by Pachauri, who was seen at the
time as more mild-mannered and industry-friendly.[142][143]

### IPCC processes[edit]

Michael Oppenheimer, a long-time participant in the IPCC and coordinating lead
author of the Fifth Assessment Report conceded in _Science Magazine's State of
the Planet 2008–2009_ some limitations of the IPCC consensus approach and asks
for concurring, smaller assessments of special problems instead of the large
scale approach as in the previous IPCC assessment reports.[116] It has become
more important to provide a broader exploration of uncertainties.[116] Others
see as well mixed blessings of the drive for consensus within the IPCC process
and ask to include dissenting or minority positions[144] or to improve
statements about uncertainties.[145][146]

The IPCC process on climate change and its efficiency and success has been
compared with dealings with other environmental challenges (compare Ozone
depletion and global warming). In case of the Ozone depletion, global
regulation based on the Montreal Protocol has been successful. In case of
Climate Change, the Kyoto Protocol failed.[147] The Ozone case was used to
assess the efficiency of the IPCC process.[148] The lockstep situation of the
IPCC is having built a broad science consensus while states and governments
still follow different, if not opposing goals.[149] The underlying linear
model of policy-making of _the more knowledge we have, the better the
political response will be_ is being doubted.[149][150]

According to Sheldon Ungar's comparison with global warming, the actors in the
ozone depletion case had a better understanding of scientific ignorance and
uncertainties.[151] The ozone case communicated to lay persons "with easy-to-
understand bridging metaphors derived from the popular culture" and related to
"immediate risks with everyday relevance", while the public opinion on climate
change sees no imminent danger.[151] The stepwise mitigation of the ozone
layer challenge was based as well on successfully reducing regional burden
sharing conflicts.[148] In case of the IPCC conclusions and the failure of the
Kyoto Protocol, varying regional cost-benefit analysis and burden-sharing
conflicts with regard to the distribution of emission reductions remain an
unsolved problem.[147] In the UK, a report for a House of Lords committee
asked to urge the IPCC to involve better assessments of costs and benefits of
climate change,[152] but the Stern Review, ordered by the UK government, made
a stronger argument in favor to combat human-made climate change.[153]

### Outdatedness of reports[edit]

Since the IPCC does not carry out its own research, it operates on the basis
of scientific papers and independently documented results from other
scientific bodies, and its schedule for producing reports requires a deadline
for submissions prior to the report's final release. In principle, this means
that any significant new evidence or events that change our understanding of
climate science between this deadline and publication of an IPCC report cannot
be included. In an area of science where our scientific understanding is
rapidly changing, this has been raised as a serious shortcoming in a body
which is widely regarded as the ultimate authority on the science.[154]
However, there has generally been a steady evolution of key findings and
levels of scientific confidence from one assessment report to the next.[
_citation needed_ ]

The submission deadlines for the Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) differed for
the reports of each Working Group. Deadlines for the Working Group I report
were adjusted during the drafting and review process in order to ensure that
reviewers had access to unpublished material being cited by the authors. The
final deadline for cited publications was 24 July 2006.[155] The final WG I
report was released on 30 April 2007 and the final AR4 Synthesis Report was
released on 17 November 2007.Rajendra Pachauri, the IPCC chair, admitted at
the launch of this report that since the IPCC began work on it, scientists
have recorded "much stronger trends in climate change", like the unforeseen
dramatic melting of polar ice in the summer of 2007,[156] and added, "that
means you better start with intervention much earlier".[157]

### Burden on participating scientists[edit]

Scientists who participate in the IPCC assessment process do so without any
compensation other than the normal salaries they receive from their home
institutions. The process is labor-intensive, diverting time and resources
from participating scientists' research programs.[158] Concerns have been
raised that the large uncompensated time commitment and disruption to their
own research may discourage qualified scientists from participating.[159]

### Lack of error correction after publication[edit]

In May 2010, Pachauri noted that the IPCC currently had no process for
responding to errors or flaws once it issued a report. The problem, according
to Pachauri, was that once a report was issued the panels of scientists
producing the reports were disbanded.[160]

### Proposed organizational overhaul[edit]

In February 2010, in response to controversies regarding claims in the Fourth
Assessment Report,[161][162] five climate scientists – all contributing or
lead IPCC report authors – wrote in the journal _Nature_ calling for changes
to the IPCC. They suggested a range of new organizational options, from
tightening the selection of lead authors and contributors, to dumping it in
favor of a small permanent body, or even turning the whole climate science
assessment process into a moderated "living" Wikipedia-IPCC.[163][164] Other
recommendations included that the panel employ a full-time staff and remove
government oversight from its processes to avoid political interference.[165]

### Reframing of scientific research[edit]

The 2018 report _What Lies Beneath_ by the Breakthrough - National Centre for
Climate Restoration, with contributions from Kevin Anderson, James Hansen,
Michael E. Mann, Michael Oppenheimer, Naomi Oreskes, Stefan Rahmstorf, Eric
Rignot, Hans Joachim Schellnhuber, Kevin Trenberth, and others, urges the
IPCC, the wider UNFCCC negotiations, and national policy makers to change
their approach. The authors note, "We urgently require a reframing of
scientific research within an existential risk-management framework."[166]

## InterAcademy Council review[edit]

In March 2010, at the invitation of the United Nations secretary-general and
the chair of the IPCC, the InterAcademy Council (IAC) was asked to review the
IPCC's processes for developing its reports.[167][168] The IAC panel, chaired
by Harold Tafler Shapiro, convened on 14 May 2010 and released its report on 1
September 2010.[160][169]

The IAC found that, "The IPCC assessment process has been successful overall".
The panel, however, made seven formal recommendations for improving the IPCC's
assessment process, including:

                    
                                                1. establish an executive committee;
                            2. elect an executive director whose term would only last for one assessment;
                            3. encourage review editors to ensure that all reviewer comments are adequately considered and genuine controversies are adequately reflected in the assessment reports;
                            4. adopt a better process for responding to reviewer comments;
                            5. working groups should use a qualitative level-of-understanding scale in the Summary for Policy Makers and Technical Summary;
                            6. "Quantitative probabilities (as in the likelihood scale) should be used to describe the probability of well-defined outcomes only when there is sufficient evidence"; and
                            7. implement a communications plan that emphasizes transparency and establish guidelines for who can speak on behalf of the organization.[170]
                    

The panel also advised that the IPCC avoid appearing to advocate specific
policies in response to its scientific conclusions.[171] Commenting on the IAC
report, _Nature News_ noted that "The proposals were met with a largely
favourable response from climate researchers who are eager to move on after
the media scandals and credibility challenges that have rocked the United
Nations body during the past nine months".[172]

## Archiving[edit]

Papers and electronic files of certain working groups of the IPCC, including
reviews and comments on drafts of their Assessment Reports, are archived at
the Environmental Science and Public Policy Archives in the Harvard Library.

## Endorsements of the IPCC[edit]

Various scientific bodies have issued official statements endorsing and
concurring with the findings of the IPCC.

                    
                                                * Joint science academies' statement of 2001. "The work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) represents the consensus of the international scientific community on climate change science. We recognise IPCC as the world's most reliable source of information on climate change and its causes, and we endorse its method of achieving this consensus".[43]
                            * Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences. "We concur with the climate science assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in 2001 ... We endorse the conclusions of the IPCC assessment..."[45]
                            * Canadian Meteorological and Oceanographic Society. "CMOS endorses the process of periodic climate science assessment carried out by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and supports the conclusion, in its Third Assessment Report, which states that the balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate."[46][ _clarification needed_ ]
                            * European Geosciences Union. "The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [...] is the main representative of the global scientific community [...][The] IPCC third assessment report [...] represents the state-of-the-art of climate science supported by the major science academies around the world and by the vast majority of scientific researchers and investigations as documented by the peer-reviewed scientific literature".[47]
                            * International Council for Science (ICSU). "...the IPCC 4th Assessment Report represents the most comprehensive international scientific assessment ever conducted. This assessment reflects the current collective knowledge on the climate system, its evolution to date, and its anticipated future development".[173]
                            * National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (USA). "Internationally, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)... is the most senior and authoritative body providing scientific advice to global policy makers".[174]
                            * United States National Research Council. "The IPCC Third Assessment Report'] conclusion that most of the observed warming of the last 50 years is likely to have been due to the increase in greenhouse gas concentrations accurately reflects the current thinking of the scientific community on this issue".[175]
                            * Network of African Science Academies. "The IPCC should be congratulated for the contribution it has made to public understanding of the nexus that exists between energy, climate and sustainability".[176]
                            * Royal Meteorological Society, in response to the release of the Fourth Assessment Report, referred to the IPCC as "The world's best climate scientists".[177]
                            * Stratigraphy Commission of the Geological Society of London. "The most authoritative assessment of climate change in the near future is provided by the Inter-Governmental Panel for Climate Change".[178]
                    

## See also[edit]

                    
                                                * 4 Degrees and Beyond International Climate Conference
                            * Avoiding dangerous climate change
                            * Indian Network on Climate Change Assessment
                            * Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
                            * List of authors from Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis
                            * Post–Kyoto Protocol negotiations on greenhouse gas emissions
                            * Robust decision making
                    

## Notes[edit]

                    
                                                1. **^**
                    
                              * Academia Nacional de Medicina de Buenos Aires
                              * Academy of Medical Sciences of Armenia
                              * Austrian Academy of Sciences
                              * Bangladesh Academy of Sciences
                              * Academia Boliviana de Medicina
                              * Brazilian Academy of Sciences
                              * Cameroon Academy of Sciences
                              * Chinese Academy of Engineering
                              * Academia Nacional de Medicina de Colombia
                              * Croatian Academy of Medical Sciences
                              * Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts
                              * Academy of Scientific Research and Technology, Egypt
                              * Académie Nationale de Médecine, France
                              * The Delegation of the Finnish Academies of Science and Letters
                              * Union of German Academies of Sciences and Humanities
                              * Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher, Leopoldina
                              * Academia de Ciencias Medicas, Fisicas y Naturales de Guatemala
                              * Hungarian Academy of Sciences
                              * Indonesian Academy of Sciences
                              * Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei
                              * TWAS, academy of sciences for the developing world
                              * Islamic World Academy of Sciences
                              * Science Council of Japan
                              * African Academy of Sciences
                              * Kenya National Academy of Sciences
                              * The National Academy of Sciences, Rep. of Korea
                              * Akademi Sains Malaysia
                              * National Academy of Medicine of Mexico
                              * Nigerian Academy of Science
                              * National Academy of Science and Technology, Philippines
                              * Polish Academy of Sciences
                              * The Caribbean Academy of Sciences
                              * Russian Academy of Medical Sciences
                              * Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts
                              * Academy of Science of South Africa
                              * National Academy of Sciences of Sri Lanka
                              * Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences
                              * The Tanzania Academy of Sciences
                              * Thai Academy of Science and Technology
                              * Turkish Academy of Sciences
                              * Uganda National Academy Sciences
                              * Academy of Medical Sciences, UK
                              * Institute of Medicine, US NAS
                    

## References[edit]

### Citations[edit]

                    
                                                1. **^** "About the IPCC". Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Retrieved  22 February 2019.
                            2. **^** "A guide to facts and fictions about climate change" (PDF). The Royal Society. March 2005. Retrieved 30 November 2009.
                            3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Weart, Spencer (December 2011). "International Cooperation: Democracy and Policy Advice (1980s)". _The Discovery of Global Warming_. American Institute of Physics. Retrieved  9 July 2012.
                            4. **^** "A guide to facts and fiction about climate change". The Royal Society. March 2005. Retrieved  24 July 2007.
                            5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Introduction to the Convention_, UNFCCC, Archived from the original on 8 January 2014 , retrieved 27 January 2014CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link). 
                            6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ IPCC. "Principles Governing IPCC Work" (PDF).. Approved 1–3 October 1998, last amended 14–18 October 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2019.
                            7. **^** "Science and policy characteristics of the Paris Agreement temperature goal" "nature climate change", 25 July 2016
                            8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Chapter 2: Evaluation of IPCC's Assessment Processes, in IAC 2010, p. 16. Archived file.
                            9. **^** "Structure of the IPCC". Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Retrieved  22 February 2019.
                            10. **^** "Understanding Climate Change: 22 years of IPCC assessment" (PDF). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). November 2010. Retrieved 2 November 2011.
                            11. **^** Sample, Ian (2 February 2007). "Scientists offered cash to dispute climate study". London: Guardian. Retrieved 24 July 2007. "Lord Rees of Ludlow, the president of the Royal Society, Britain's most prestigious scientific institute, said: "The IPCC is the world's leading authority on climate change...""
                            12. **^** "The Nobel Peace Prize for 2007". Nobelprize.org. 12 October 2007. Archived from the original on 5 February 2010. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            13. **^** "Decisions adopted by the 43rd Session of the Panel" (PDF). p. 11 decision 6.
                            14. **^** https://www.ipcc.ch/2015/06/06/ipcc-elects-hoesung-lee-of-republic-of-korea-as-chair/
                            15. **^** "IPCC press release 24 February 2015: IPCC agrees on Acting Chair after R.K. Pachauri steps down" (PDF). _IPCC_. Retrieved  22 February 2019.
                            16. **^** "16 Years of Scientific Assessment in Support of the Climate Convention" (PDF).
                            17. **^** [1]
                            18. **^** "Structure of the IPCC". IPCC. Retrieved  22 February 2019.
                            19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ IPCC Bureau
                            20. **^** "Terms of Reference of the Bureau" (PDF). Retrieved 25 February 2019.
                            21. **^** "Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories". Retrieved  25 February 2019.
                            22. **^** "IPCC Executive Committee" (PDF). Retrieved 25 February 2019.
                            23. **^** "Financial Procedures for the IPCC" (PDF). Retrieved 25 February 2019.
                            24. **^** "The IPCC: Who Are They and Why Do Their Climate Reports Matter?". _Union of Concerned Scientists_. Retrieved  20 May 2016.
                            25. **^** IPCC. "IPCC Factsheet: How does the IPCC review process work?" (PDF). _Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_. IPCC. Retrieved  18 January 2018.
                            26. **^** "The IPCC: Who Are They and Why Do Their Climate Reports Matter?". _Union of Concerned Scientists_. Retrieved  29 September 2017.
                            27. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Sources for IPCC Reports, 32nd Session, 2010 pp6–7
                            28. **^** IPCC. About the IPCC
                            29. **^** Appendix A to the Principles Governing IPCC Work
                            30. **^** e.g., Barker, T. (28 February 2005). "House of Lords Select Committee on Economic Affairs Minutes of Evidence. Memorandum by Dr Terry Baker, Cambridge University", in Economic Affairs Committee 2005
                            31. **^** e.g., Economic Affairs Committee. "Abstract", in Economic Affairs Committee 2005
                            32. **^** e.g., Interacademy Council (1 October 2010). "Executive summary". _Climate Change Assessments, Review of the Processes & Procedures of the IPCC_. ISBN 978-90-6984-617-0. Report website.
                            33. **^** "IPCC Factsheet: How does the IPCC select its authors?" (PDF). 30 August 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2018.
                            34. **^** Working Group 1, IPCC.
                            35. **^** Working Group 2 Archived 3 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine, IPCC.
                            36. **^** Working Group 3 Archived 8 July 2005 at the Wayback Machine, IPCC.
                            37. **^** Synthesis Report Archived 17 June 2005 at the Wayback Machine, IPCC.
                            38. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Question 2", _Box 2-1: Confidence and likelihood statements_ , archived from the original on 4 June 2011, in IPCC TAR SYR 2001, p. 44
                            39. **^** Ahmad, Q.K.; et al., "Ch 2: Methods and Tools", _Sec. 2.6.2. "Objective" and "Subjective" Probabilities are not Always Explicitly Distinguished_, archived from the original on 4 May 2013 , in IPCC TAR WG2 2001.
                            40. **^** Granger Morgan, M.; et al. (2009), _Synthesis and Assessment Product 5.2: Best practice approaches for characterizing, communicating, and incorporating scientific uncertainty in decisionmaking. A Report by the U.S. Climate Change Science Program (CCSP) and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research_ (PDF), Washington D.C., USA.: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2013, pp.19–20; 27–28. Report website. Archived 11 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine
                            41. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ "Summary for Policymakers", _Table SPM-3, Question 9_, archived from the original on 2 October 2012 , in IPCC TAR SYR 2001.
                            42. **^** Nicholls, R.J.; et al., "Ch 6: Coastal Systems and Low-Lying Areas", _Table 6.11_ , in IPCC AR4 WG2 2007, p. 343
                            43. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Joint statement by 16 national science academies (17 May 2001), _The Science of Climate Change_ (PDF), London, UK: Royal Society, ISBN 978-0854035588, archived from the original (PDF) on 19 April 2015
                            44. **^** Statement, J. (18 May 2001), "The Science of Climate Change (editorial)", _Science_ , **292** (5520): 1261, doi:10.1126/science.292.5520.1261
                            45. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ CFCAS Letter to PM, November 25, 2005 Archived 21 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine
                            46. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bob Jones. "CMOS Position Statement on Global Warming". Cmos.ca. Retrieved 25 June 2012.
                            47. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ European Geosciences Union Divisions of Atmospheric and Climate Sciences (7 July 2005). "Position Statement on Climate Change and Recent Letters from the Chairman of the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce".
                            48. **^** US NRC 2001
                            49. **^** _Summary_ , in US NRC 2001, p. 1
                            50. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Summary_ , in US NRC 2001, p. 4
                            51. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Lindzen, R.S. (1 May 2001), _PREPARED STATEMENT OF DR. RICHARD S. LINDZEN, MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, in: S. Hrg. 107-1027 – INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE (IPCC) THIRD ASSESSMENT REPORT. US Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation_, Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office (GPO) , pp.29–31. Available in text and PDF formats. Also available as a PDF from Professor Lindzen's website.
                            52. **^** _Preface_, archived from the original on 1 May 2013 , in IPCC TAR WG1 2001
                            53. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _The Great Global Warming Swindle. Programme directed by Martin Durkin, on Channel 4 on Thursday 8 March 2007. Critique by John Houghton, President, John Ray Initiative_ (PDF), Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, UK: John Ray Initiative, p.4.
                            54. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Trenberth K. E. (May 2001), "Stronger Evidence of Human Influence on Climate: The 2001 IPCC Assessment" (PDF), _Environment_ , Heldref, **43** (4) , p.11.
                            55. **^** _Ch 7 Assessing Progress in Climate Science_ , in US NRC 2001, p. 22
                            56. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Press flyer announcing 2007 report IPCC
                            57. **^** "Synthesis Report - Question 9". _www.ipcc.ch_. Retrieved  20 May 2016.
                            58. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Synthesis report", _Sec 6.1. Observed changes in climate and their effects, and their causes_ , in IPCC AR4 SYR 2007
                            59. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Synthesis report", _Treatment of uncertainty, in: Introduction_ , in IPCC AR4 SYR 2007
                            60. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Synthesis report", _Sec 6.2 Drivers and projections of future climate changes and their impacts_ , in IPCC AR4 SYR 2007
                            61. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Synthesis report", _Sec 6.3 Responses to climate change_ , in IPCC AR4 SYR 2007
                            62. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Summary for Policymakers", _3. Projected climate change and its impacts_ , in IPCC AR4 SYR 2007
                            63. **^** Future climate change, in UK Royal Society 2010, p. 10
                            64. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Academia Brasileira de Ciéncias & others 2007
                            65. **^** Academia Brasileira de Ciéncias & others 2008
                            66. **^** Academia Brasileira de Ciéncias & others 2009
                            67. **^**
                              * Lambeck 2007
                              * Australian Academy of Science & no date
                              * Australian Academy of Science 2010
                            68. **^** NASAC 2007
                            69. **^** IAMP 2010
                            70. **^** PBL & others 2009
                            71. **^** PBL 2010
                            72. **^** Summary, in PBL & others 2009, p. 7
                            73. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Executive summary, in PBL 2010, p. 9
                            74. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Summary, p.3, in US NRC 2010
                            75. **^** Section 3.2: Errors, in: Chapter 3: Results and discussion, in PBL 2010, pp. 35–37
                            76. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ IPCC 2013
                            77. **^** IPCC (11 November 2013): B. Observed Changes in the Climate System, in: Summary for Policymakers (finalized version), in: IPCC AR5 WG1 2013, p. 2
                            78. **^** IPCC (11 November 2013): B.5 Carbon and Other Biogeochemical Cycles, in: Summary for Policymakers (finalized version), in: IPCC AR5 WG1 2013, p. 9
                            79. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ IPCC (11 November 2013): D. Understanding the Climate System and its Recent Changes, in: Summary for Policymakers (finalized version), in: IPCC AR5 WG1 2013, p. 13
                            80. **^** IPCC (11 November 2013): Footnote 2, in: Summary for Policymakers (finalized version), in: IPCC AR5 WG1 2013, p. 2
                            81. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Summary for Policymakers, p.14 (archived 25 June 2014), in IPCC AR5 WG2 A 2014
                            82. **^** Summary for Policymakers, p.23 (archived 25 June 2014), in IPCC AR5 WG2 A 2014
                            83. **^** SPM.3 Trends in stocks and flows of greenhouse gases and their drivers, in: Summary for Policymakers, p.8 (archived 2 July 2014), in IPCC AR5 WG3 2014
                            84. **^** Victor, D., _et al._ , Executive summary, in: Chapter 1: Introductory Chapter, p.4 (archived 3 July 2014), in IPCC AR5 WG3 2014
                            85. **^** SPM.4.1 Long‐term mitigation pathways, in: Summary for Policymakers, p.15 (archived 2 July 2014), in IPCC AR5 WG3 2014
                            86. **^** Collins, M., _et al._ : Section 12.3.1.3 The New Concentration Driven RCP Scenarios, and their Extensions, in: Chapter 12: Long-term Climate Change: Projections, Commitments and Irreversibility (archived 16 July 2014), in: IPCC AR5 WG1 2013, pp. 1045–1047
                            87. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "IPCC – Activities". Ipcc.ch. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            88. **^** IPCC SRES 2000
                            89. **^** Summary for Policymakers, in IPCC SRES 2000, p. 3
                            90. **^** "Summary for Policymakers", _Question 3_, archived from the original on 29 September 2012 , in IPCC TAR SYR 2001
                            91. **^** "Summary for Policymakers", _3. Projected climate change and its impacts_ , in IPCC AR4 SYR 2007
                            92. **^** Morita, T.; et al., "Ch 2. Greenhouse Gas Emission Mitigation Scenarios and Implications", _2.5.1.1 IPCC Emissions Scenarios and the SRES Process_, archived from the original on 4 May 2013 , in IPCC TAR WG3 2001
                            93. **^** "Synthesis report", _3.1 Emissions scenarios_ , in IPCC AR4 SYR 2007
                            94. **^** "Ch 3. Review of Major Climate-Change Scenario Exercises" (PDF), _Sec 3.1.1. Significance and use_ , archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2013, in Parson & others 2007, p. 31
                            95. **^** "Ch 3. Review of Major Climate-Change Scenario Exercises" (PDF), _Sec 3.1.2. Criticisms and controversies_ , archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2013, in Parson & others 2007, pp. 35–38
                            96. **^** "Ch 3. Review of Major Climate-Change Scenario Exercises" (PDF), _Sec 3.1.2. Criticisms and controversies: Exchange rates: PPP versus MER_ , archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2013, in Parson & others 2007, p. 36
                            97. **^** "Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation – SRREN". Srren.ipcc-wg3.de. Archived from the original on 9 May 2011. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            98. **^** "IPCC". Ipcc-wg2.gov. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            99. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (Report). Incheon, Republic of Korea: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 7 October 2018. Retrieved  7 October 2018.
                            100. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Headline Statements (PDF). _Global Warming of 1.5 °C an IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty_ (Report). IPCC. 8 October 2018. p. 3. Retrieved 8 October 2018.
                            101. **^** Press release: Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5ºC (PDF) (Report). Incheon, Republic of Korea: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 7 October 2018. Retrieved 7 October 2018.
                            102. **^** Irfan, Umair (6 October 2018). "A major climate report will slam the door on wishful thinking". Vox. Retrieved 7 October 2018.
                            103. **^** "Global Warming of 1.5 °C an IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty". _Intergovermental Panel on Climate change_. Retrieved  7 October 2018.
                            104. **^** Davenport, Coral (7 October 2018). "Major Climate Report Describes a Strong Risk of Crisis as Early as 2040". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  8 October 2018.
                            105. **^** "National Greenhouse Gas Inventory Program". Ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            106. **^** "Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories". Ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            107. **^** "IPCC 2006 GLs". Ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            108. **^** "Greenhouse Gas Emissions". Unfccc.int. 22 February 2012. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            109. **^** "Welcome to the IPCC Data Distribution Centre". Ipcc-data.org. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            110. **^** "IPCC – National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme". Ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            111. **^** "2007 Nobel Peace Prize Laureates". Retrieved  11 October 2007.
                            112. **^**
                              * "Scientists Send Letter to Congress and Federal Agencies Supporting IPCC". American Geophysical Union. Archived from the original on 21 October 2011. Retrieved  28 March 2011.
                              * Yohe, G.W.; et al. "An Open Letter from Scientists in the United States on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and Errors Contained in the Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007". Archived from the original on 15 March 2010.. Note: According to Yohe _et al._ (2010), more than 250 scientists have signed the statement.
                            113. **^** Chapter 1: Introduction, in IAC 2010, pp. 1–2. Archived file.
                            114. **^** Bagla, 2010; Schiermeier, 2010, quoted in Hulme 2010
                            115. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Evaluation, characterization, and communication of uncertainty by the intergovernmental panel on climate change—an introductory essay Climatic ChangeAn Interdisciplinary, International Journal Devoted to the Description, Causes and Implications of Climatic Change, Gary Yohe and Michael Oppenheimer 2011
                            116. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Oppenheimer, Michael; O'Neill, Brian C.; Webster, Mort; Agrawal, Shardul (2007). "CLIMATE CHANGE, The Limits of Consensus". _Science_. **317** (5844): 1505–06. doi:10.1126/science.1144831. reprinted in Oppenheimer, Michael; O'Neill, Brian C.; Webster, Mort; Agrawal, Shardul (2008). "The limits of consensus". In Donald Kennedy and the Editors of _Science_ (ed.). _Science Magazine's State of the Planet 2008-2009: with a Special Section on Energy and Sustainability_. ISBN 9781597264051.
                            117. **^** Hulme,M. (2013) Exploring climate change through science and in society: an anthology of Mike Hulme’s essays, interviews and speechesRoutledge, Abingdon, UK, 330pp
                            118. **^** Tol, Richard S. J. (2010) : Regulating knowledge monopolies: The case of the IPCC, ESRI working paper, No. 350
                            119. **^** Bagla, P. (29 January 2010). "Climate Science Leader Rajendra Pachauri Confronts the Critics". _Science_. **327** (5965): 510–511. Bibcode:2010Sci...327..510B. doi:10.1126/science.327.5965.510. PMID 20110473.
                            120. **^** Ben Webster; Robin Pagnamenta (15 February 2010). "UN must investigate warming 'bias', says former climate chief – Times Online". London: The Times. Archived from the original on 29 May 2010. Retrieved 19 February 2010.
                            121. **^** "Martin Parry". Retrieved  27 December 2015.
                            122. **^** David Adam (14 February 2010). "Climate scientist says Himalayan glacier report is 'robust and rigorous' | Environment". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 19 February 2010.
                            123. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jones, P. D.; Briffa, K. R.; Osborn, T. J.; Lough, J. M.; Van Ommen, T. D.; Vinther, B. M.; Luterbacher, J.; Wahl, E. R.; Zwiers, F. W.; Mann, M. E.; Schmidt, G. A.; Ammann, C. M.; Buckley, B. M.; Cobb, K. M.; Esper, J.; Goosse, H.; Graham, N.; Jansen, E.; Kiefer, T.; Kull, C.; Kuttel, M.; Mosley-Thompson, E.; Overpeck, J. T.; Riedwyl, N.; Schulz, M.; Tudhope, A. W.; Villalba, R.; Wanner, H.; Wolff, E.; Xoplaki, E. (2009). "High-resolution palaeoclimatology of the last millennium: a review of current status and future prospects" (PDF). _The Holocene_. **19** (1): 3–49. Bibcode:2009Holoc..19....3J. doi:10.1177/0959683608098952. p. 36
                            124. **^** "Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis" (PDF).
                            125. **^** Folland et al. 2001, 2.3.2.2 Multi-proxy synthesis of recent temperature change Archived 4 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine
                            126. **^** Daly 2001
                            127. **^** McIntyre, Stephen; McKitrick, Ross (2005). "Hockey sticks, principal components, and spurious significance" (PDF). _Geophysical Research Letters_. **32** (3): L03710. Bibcode:2005GeoRL..32.3710M. doi:10.1029/2004GL021750. Retrieved  31 October 2013.
                            128. **^** Weart 2011c, footnote 48,(p. 19, n1 in pdf).
                            129. **^** Jansen et al. 2007, Sec. 6.6.1.1: What Do Reconstructions Based on Palaeoclimatic Proxies Show?, p. 466.
                            130. **^** Washington Post editorial, 23 July 2005, Hunting Witches".
                            131. **^** Revkin, 22 June 2006 (NYT).
                            132. **^** Bradley, Raymond S.; Hughes, Malcolm K.; Mann, Michael E. (2006). "Authors were clear about hockey-stick uncertainties". _Nature_. **442** (7103): 627. Bibcode:2006Natur.442..627B. doi:10.1038/442627b. PMID 16900179.
                            133. **^** Jansen et al. 2007, Section 6.6: The Last 2,000 Years.
                            134. **^** Scherer, Glenn (6 December 2012). "Climate Science Predictions Prove Too Conservative". _Scientific American_. Retrieved  11 September 2017.
                            135. **^** McKibben, Bill (15 March 2007). "Warning on Warming". _The New York Review of Books_. **54** (4): 18. Bibcode:2004Natur.427..197S. doi:10.1038/427197a. Retrieved  21 February 2010.
                            136. **^** Black, Richard (2 February 2007). "Humans blamed for climate change". BBC News. Retrieved 24 July 2007.
                            137. **^** "Sea level rise 'under-estimated '". BBC News. 14 December 2006. Retrieved 24 July 2007.
                            138. **^** Highfield, Roger (28 December 2006). "London-on-Sea: the future of a city in decay". Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 24 July 2007.
                            139. **^** "James Hansen's controversial sea level rise paper has now been published online". Washington Post. 2015.
                            140. **^** "Climate change: The scientific basis". CTV Television Network. 5 February 2007. Archived from the original on 5 February 2007. Retrieved  24 July 2007.
                            141. **^** Fox interview [ _unreliable source?_ ]
                            142. **^** Pearce, Fred (19 April 2002). "Top climate scientist ousted". New Scientist. Retrieved 24 July 2007.
                            143. **^** Borger, Julian (20 April 2002). "US and Oil Lobby Oust Climate Change Scientist". London: Guardian. Retrieved 24 July 2007.
                            144. **^** Lessons from the IPCC: do scientific assessments need to be consensual to be authoritative? Mike Hulme, in (eds.) Doubelday,R. and Willesden,J. March 2013, page 142 ff
                            145. **^** Do scientific assessments need to be consensual to be authoritative? Curry, JA and PJ Webster, 2012: Climate change: no consensus on consensus. CAB Reviews, in press, 2012
                            146. **^** Lemonick, Michael D. (1 November 2010). "Climate heretic: Judith Curry turns on her colleagues". _Nature_. doi:10.1038/news.2010.577. Retrieved  22 December 2010.
                            147. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Of Montreal and Kyoto: A Tale of Two Protocols by Cass Sunstein 38 ELR 10566 8/2008
                            148. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ [http://www.mpifg.de/pu/mpifg_book/mpifg_bd_39.pdf Technische Problemlösung, Verhandeln und umfassende Problemlösung, Reiner Grundmann in Gesellschaftliche Komplexität und kollektive Handlungsfähigkeit, ed. Schimank, U. (2000). Frankfurt/Main: Campus, p.154-182 book summary at the Max Planck Gesellschaft, in German
                            149. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Grundmann, Reiner; Stehr, Nico (2010). "Climate Change: What Role for Sociology?". _Current Sociology_. **58** (6): 897–910. doi:10.1177/0011392110376031.
                            150. **^** Environmental Politics Climate Change and Knowledge Politics Archived 26 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine Reiner Grundmann Vol. 16, No. 3, 414–432, June 2007]
                            151. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ [Knowledge, ignorance and the popular culture: climate change versus the ozone hole, by Sheldon Ungar, doi: 10.1088/0963-6625/9/3/306 Public Understanding of Science July 2000 vol. 9 no. 3 297-312 [https://web.archive.org/web/20140908033209/http://pus.sagepub.com/content/9/3/297.short Archived 8 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine Abstract]
                            152. **^** _The Economics of Climate Change_
                            153. **^** See main article on Stern Review[ _unreliable source?_ ]
                            154. **^** Example of concerns over outdatedness of IPCC reports, see p.3 Archived 1 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine
                            155. **^** "Guidelines for inclusion of recent scientific literature in the Working Group I Fourth Assessment Report" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2008.
                            156. **^** Carbon Equity report on the Arctic summer of 2007 Archived 25 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine
                            157. **^** Rosenthal, Elisabeth; Kanter, James (18 November 2007). "Alarming UN report on climate change too rosy, many say". New York Times. Retrieved 22 February 2010.
                            158. **^** Committee on Analysis of Global Change Assessments; Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate; Division of Earth and Life Sciences (2007). _Analysis of Global Change Assessments: Lessons Learned_. National Academies Press. ISBN 978-0-309-10485-2. Retrieved 24 July 2007.
                            159. **^** Cicerone, Ralph J.; Barron, Eric J.; Dickinson, Robert E.; Fung, Inez Y.; Hansen, James E.; Karl, Thomas R.; Lindzen, Richard S.; McWilliams, James C.; Rowland, F. Sherwood; Sarachik, Edward S.; Wallace, John M.; Turekian, Vaughan C. (2001). "Assessing Progress in Climate Science". _Climate Change Science: An Analysis of Some Key Questions_. National Academies Press. Committee on the Science of Climate Change, Division on Earth and Life Studies, National Research Council. ISBN 978-0-309-07574-9. Retrieved 31 October 2013.
                            160. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Associated Press, "U.N. climate chief welcomes review, defends work", _Japan Times_ , 16 May 2010, p. 5.
                            161. **^** "Top scientists call for overhaul of UN climate panel". Brisbane Times. 10 February 2010. Retrieved  11 February 2010.
                            162. **^** Gibson, Eloise (12 February 2010). "Climate panel facing calls to restructure". _The New Zealand Herald_. Retrieved  11 February 2010.
                            163. **^** "Nature TOC 2010-02-11, volume 463 number 7282, opinions". 100211 nature.com
                            164. **^** Dayton, Leigh (11 February 2010). "Scientists say IPCC should be overhauled or scrapped". _The Australian_. 100211 theaustralian.com.au
                            165. **^** Agence France-Presse-Jiji Press, "UN climate panel needs fix: scientists", _The Age_ , 11 February 2010.
                            166. **^** "The Scientific Understatement Of Climate Risks". _Breakthrough Institute_. 2018.
                            167. **^** Black, Richard (10 March 2010). "Scientists to review climate body". _BBC News_. Retrieved  4 April 2010.
                            168. **^** "UN Requests IAC Review of IPCC". InterAcademy Council. Retrieved  31 August 2010.
                            169. **^** "InterAcademy Council Report Recommends Fundamental Reform of IPCC Management Structure". _Review of the IPCC_. InterAcademy Council. 30 August 2010. Retrieved  31 August 2010.
                            170. **^** "Climate Change Assessments: Review of the processes and procedures of the IPCC" (PDF). InterAcademy Council. n.d. Retrieved 1 September 2010.
                            171. **^** MacFarquhar, Neil (30 August 2010). "Review Finds Flaws in U.N. Climate Panel Structure". New York Times.
                            172. **^** Tollefson, J. (2010). "Climate panel must adapt to survive". _Nature_. **467** (7311): 14. doi:10.1038/467014a. PMID 20811426.
                            173. **^** Statement by ICSU on the controversy around the 4th IPCC Assessment 23 February, 2010 Archived 7 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine
                            174. **^** "NOAA Global Warming FAQs". Ncdc.noaa.gov. 20 August 2008. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            175. **^** _Summary_ , in US NRC 2001, p. 3
                            176. **^** "Joint statement by the Network of African Science Academies (NASAC)" (PDF). Network of African Science Academies. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 September 2008. Retrieved 29 March 2008.
                            177. **^** "Royal Meteorological Society's statement on the IPCC's Fourth Assessment Report". Rmets.org. 14 February 2007. Retrieved  25 June 2012.
                            178. **^** Zalasiewicz, Jan; et al. "Global warming: a perspective from earth history". Geological Society of London. Archived from the original on 23 February 2009. Retrieved 22 February 2010.
                    

### Sources[edit]

                    
                                                * Academia Brasileira de Ciéncias; et al. (16 May 2007), _Sustainability, energy efficiency and climate protection. A joint-statement made by the science academies of the G8 nations and Brazil, China, India, Mexico and South Africa (the G8+5)_ (PDF), London, UK: Royal Society. Statement website.
                            * Academia Brasileira de Ciéncias; et al. (10 June 2008), _Climate change adaptation and the transition to a low carbon society. A joint-statement made by the science academies of the G8 nations and Brazil, China, India, Mexico and South Africa (the G8+5)_ (PDF), London, UK: Royal Society. Statement website.
                            * Academia Brasileira de Ciéncias; et al. (1 May 2009), _Climate change and the transformation of energy technologies for a low carbon future. A joint-statement made by the science academies of the G8 nations and Brazil, China, India, Mexico and South Africa (the G8+5)_ (PDF), London, UK: Royal Society. Statement website.
                            * Australian Academy of Science (n.d.), _Science Policy: Climate Change: The Australian Academy of Science's comments on the Joint science academies' statement: Climate change adaptation and the transition to a low carbon society_, Canberra: Australian Academy of Science, archived from the original on 21 September 2013 , retrieved 10 September 2013
                            * Australian Academy of Science (August 2010), _The Science of Climate Change: questions and answers_, Canberra: Australian Academy of Science, ISBN 085847 286 4, archived from the original on 12 August 2013. Low-resolution (2 Mb) or high-resolution PDF (25 Mb).
                            * Economic Affairs Committee (21 June 2005). "The Economics of Climate Change, the Second Report of the 2005–2006 session, produced by the UK Parliament House of Lords Economics Affairs Select Committee". London, UK: The Stationery Office Ltd., by order of the House of Lords. High-resolution PDF versions: HL 12-I (report), HL 12-II (evidence).
                            * IAC (1 October 2010), _Climate Change Assessments, Review of the Processes & Procedures of the IPCC_, InterAcademy Council (IAC), ISBN 978 90 6984 617 0, Archived from the original on 2 January 2014, retrieved 27 January 2014CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link).
                            * IAMP (2010), _Inter Academy Medical Panel (IAMP) Statement on the Health Co-Benefits of Policies to Tackle Climate Change_, Trieste, Italy: Inter Academy Panel (IAP) Secretariat, hosted by The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS)
                            * IPCC (September 2013), _IPCC AR5 leaflet_ (PDF), retrieved 28 November 2013
                            * IPCC AR5 WG3 (2014), Edenhofer, O.; et al. (eds.), _Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III (WG3) to the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)_, Cambridge University Press, Archived from the original on 29 October 2014 CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link). Archived
                            * IPCC AR5 WG2 A (2014), Field, C.B.; et al. (eds.), _Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II (WG2) to the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)_, Cambridge University Press, Archived from the original on 28 April 2016 CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link). Archived
                            * IPCC AR5 WG1 (2013), Stocker, T.F.; et al. (eds.), _Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Working Group 1 (WG1) Contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 5th Assessment Report (AR5)_, Cambridge University Press. Climate Change 2013 Working Group 1 website.
                            * IPCC AR4 SYR (2007). Core Writing Team; Pachauri, R.K.; Reisinger, A. (eds.). _Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report (SYR)_. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva, Switzerland: IPCC. ISBN 978-92-9169-122-7..
                            * IPCC AR4 WG1 (2007). Solomon, S.; Qin, D.; Manning, M.; Chen, Z.; Marquis, M.; Averyt, K.B.; Tignor, M.; Miller, H.L. (eds.). _Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis_. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88009-1. (pb: 978-0-521-70596-7)
                            * IPCC AR4 WG2 (2007). Parry, M.L.; Canziani, O.F.; Palutikof, J.P.; van der Linden, P.J.; Hanson, C.E. (eds.). _Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability_. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88010-7. (pb: 978-0-521-70597-4)
                            * IPCC AR4 WG3 (2007). Metz, B.; Davidson, O.R.; Bosch, P.R.; Dave, R.; Meyer, L.A. (eds.). _Climate Change 2007: Mitigation of Climate Change_. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88011-4 (pb: 978-0-521-70598-1).
                            * IPCC TAR SYR (2001). Watson, R. T.; the Core Writing Team (eds.). _Climate Change 2001: Synthesis Report_. _Climate Change 2001: Synthesis Report_. Contribution of Working Groups I, II, and III to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. Bibcode:2002ccsr.book.....W. ISBN 978-0-521-80770-8. (pb: 0-521-01507-3)
                            * IPCC TAR WG1 (2001). Houghton, J.T.; Ding, Y.; Griggs, D.J.; Noguer, M.; van der Linden, P.J.; Dai, X.; Maskell, K.; Johnson, C.A. (eds.). _Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis_. Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80767-8. Archived from the original on 30 March 2016. (pb: 0-521-01495-6)
                            * IPCC TAR WG2 (2001). McCarthy, J. J.; Canziani, O. F.; Leary, N. A.; Dokken, D. J.; White, K. S. (eds.). _Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability_. Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80768-5. Archived from the original on 14 May 2016. (pb: 0-521-01500-6)
                            * IPCC TAR WG3; Davidson, Ogunlade; Swart, Rob; Pan, Jiahua (2001), Metz, B.; Davidson, O.; Swart, R.; Pan, J. (eds.), "Climate Change 2001: Mitigation", _Climate Change 2001: Mitigation_ , Contribution of Working Group III to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Bibcode:2001ccm..book.....M, ISBN 978-0-521-80769-2, archived from the original on 27 February 2017 (pb: 0-521-01502-2)
                            * IPCC SRES (2000), Nakićenović, N.; Swart, R. (eds.), _Special Report on Emissions Scenarios: A special report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-80081-5, archived from the original (book) on 3 February 2017, 978-052180081-5 (pb: 0-521-80493-0, 978-052180493-6). Also published in English (html) (PDF) on the IPCC website. Summary for policymakers available in French, Russian, and Spanish.
                            * IPCC SAR WG1 (1996). Houghton, J.T.; Meira Filho, L.G.; Callander, B.A.; Harris, N.; Kattenberg, A.; Maskell, K. (eds.). _Climate Change 1995: The Science of Climate Change_. Contribution of Working Group I to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-56433-5. (pb: 0-521-56436-0) pdf.
                            * IPCC SAR WG3 (1996). Bruce, J.P.; Lee, H.; Haites, E.F. (eds.). _Climate Change 1995: Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change_ (PDF). Contribution of Working Group III (WG3) to the Second Assessment Report (SAR) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-56051-1 (pb: 0-521-56854-4)
                            * ITGP (October 2010), _THIRTY-SECOND SESSION OF THE IPCC, held in Busan, (IPCC-XXXII/INF. 4 (27.IX.2010)). REVIEW OF THE IPCC PROCESSES AND PROCEDURES: Notes on the Informal Task Group on Procedures (ITGP)_ (PDF), IPCC, Archived from the original on 6 July 2013, retrieved 1 February 2014CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link).
                            * Lambeck, K. (7 February 2007), _Science Policy: On the edge of global calamity_, Canberra: Australian Academy of Science, archived from the original on 6 August 2013.
                            * Meinshausen, M.; et al. (November 2011), "The RCP greenhouse gas concentrations and their extensions from 1765 to 2300 (open access)", _Climatic Change_ , **109** (1–2): 213–241, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0156-z.
                            * NASAC (2007), _Joint statement by the Network of African Science Academies (NASAC) to the G8 on sustainability, energy efficiency and climate change_ (PDF), Nairobi, Kenya: NASAC Secretariat, archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2014, retrieved 10 September 2013. Statement website.
                            * PAGES 2k Consortium (21 April 2013), "Continental-scale temperature variability during the past two millennia" (PDF), _Nature Geoscience_ , **6** (5): 339–346, Bibcode:2013NatGe...6..339P, doi:10.1038/ngeo1797 (78 researchers, corresponding author Darrell S. Kaufman).
                            * Parson, E.; et al. (July 2007), _Global Change Scenarios: Their Development and Use. Sub-report 2.1B of Synthesis and Assessment Product 2.1 by the U.S. Climate Change Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research_, Washington, DC., USA: Department of Energy, Office of Biological & Environmental Research, archived from the original on 30 June 2013
                            * PBL; et al. (November 2009), _News in climate science and exploring boundaries: A Policy brief on developments since the IPCC AR4 report in 2007. A report by the Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL), Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), and Wageningen University and Research Centre (WUR)_ (PDF), Bilthoven, Netherlands: PBL, archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2014. Report website.
                            * PBL (5 July 2010), _Assessing an IPCC assessment. An analysis of statements on projected regional impacts in the 2007 report. A report by the Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL)_ (PDF), Bilthoven, Netherlands: PBL. Report website.
                            * Rive, N.; Jackson, B.; Rado, D.; Marsh, R. (11 June 2007). "Complaint to Ofcom Regarding "The Great Global Warming Swindle" (final revision)". OfcomSwindleComplaint website.. Also available as a PDF
                            * Stern, N. (2006). "Stern Review Report on the Economics of Climate Change (pre-publication edition)". London, UK: HM Treasury. Archived from the original on 7 April 2010. Retrieved 8 March 2017.
                            * UK Royal Society, _Climate Change: A Summary of the Science_ (PDF), London: Royal Society. Report website.
                            * US NRC (2001), _Climate Change Science: An Analysis of Some Key Questions. A report by the Committee on the Science of Climate Change, US National Research Council (NRC)_, Washington, D.C., USA: National Academy Press, ISBN 978-0-309-07574-9, archived from the original on 5 June 2011
                            * US NRC (2010), _America's Climate Choices: Panel on Advancing the Science of Climate Change; A report by the US National Research Council (NRC)_, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, ISBN 978-0-309-14588-6, archived from the original on 29 May 2014
                    

## Further reading[edit]

                    
                                                * Agrawala, S. (August 1998). "Context and Early Origins of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change". _Climatic Change_. **39** (4): 605–620. doi:10.1023/A:1005315532386.
                            * Agrawala, S. (August 1998). "Structural and Process History of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change". _Climatic Change_. **39** (4): 621–642. doi:10.1023/A:1005312331477.
                            * The World Bank climate change and water sector, 2009 Water and Climate Change: Understanding the Risks and Making Climate-Smart Investment Decisions. Retrieved 31 October 2013.
                    

## External links[edit]

                    
                                                * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
                              * IPCC Organisation
                              * "IPCC Principles" (PDF). (8.38 KB)
                              * IPCC publications
                              * "IPCC – _16 years of Scientific Assessment in Support of the Climate Convention_ " (PDF). (618 KB).
                              * IPCC AR4 WG1 Report Available for Purchase
                                * Summaries for Policymakers (SPMs) of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: 
                                  * "Working Group I (The Physical Science Basis)" (PDF). (3.67 MB),
                                  * "Working Group II (Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability)" (PDF). (923 KB)
                                  * "Working Group III (Mitigation of Climate Change)" (PDF). (631 KB)
                              * "Papers of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change". Harvard College Library. Archived from the original on 27 April 2010. Retrieved 14 May 2010. — The collection of drafts, review-comments and other documents relating to the work of the Working Group I of the Assessment Report 4.
                            * A summary of the Fifth Assessment Report WG1 TS and of the Fourth Assessment Report SPMs by GreenFacts.org
                            * The World Bank – Climate Change and concerns over water resources The World Bank's portal to climate change and water publications.
                            * IPCC article at the Encyclopedia of Earth – General overview of the IPCC
                            * Climate Change – What Is the IPCC by Jean-Marc Jancovici
                            * Climate Change Freeview Video Interview 2006 – Sherwood Rowland, Nobel Laureate (1995) for work on ozone depletion discusses climate change. Provided by the Vega Science Trust.
                            * Evolution of Climate Science in the IPCC Assessments: Understanding the 20th Century Climate Change. A video of a lecture given at Princeton University by Venkatachalam Ramaswamy, Acting Director and Senior Scientist, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL), Professor in Geosciences and Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences, Princeton University.
                            * IPCC Data Distribution Centre Climate data and guidance on its use.
                    

## Awards and achievements

Preceded by  
Grameen Bank  
and  
Muhammad Yunus | **Nobel Peace Prize Laureate  
with Al Gore**  
2007 | Succeeded by  
Martti Ahtisaari

                    
                                                * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize

* * *

1901–1925|

                    
                                                * 1901: Henry Dunant / Frédéric Passy
                            * 1902: Élie Ducommun / Charles Gobat
                            * 1903: Randal Cremer
                            * 1904: Institut de Droit International
                            * 1905: Bertha von Suttner
                            * 1906: Theodore Roosevelt
                            * 1907: Ernesto Moneta / Louis Renault
                            * 1908: Klas Arnoldson / Fredrik Bajer
                            * 1909: A. M. F. Beernaert / Paul Estournelles de Constant
                            * 1910: International Peace Bureau
                            * 1911: Tobias Asser / Alfred Fried
                            * 1912: Elihu Root
                            * 1913: Henri La Fontaine
                            * 1914
                            * 1915
                            * 1916
                            * 1917: International Committee of the Red Cross
                            * 1918
                            * 1919: Woodrow Wilson
                            * 1920: Léon Bourgeois
                            * 1921: Hjalmar Branting / Christian Lange
                            * 1922: Fridtjof Nansen
                            * 1923
                            * 1924
                            * 1925: Austen Chamberlain / Charles Dawes
                    

1926–1950|

                    
                                                * 1926: Aristide Briand / Gustav Stresemann
                            * 1927: Ferdinand Buisson / Ludwig Quidde
                            * 1928
                            * 1929: Frank B. Kellogg
                            * 1930: Nathan Söderblom
                            * 1931: Jane Addams / Nicholas Butler
                            * 1932
                            * 1933: Norman Angell
                            * 1934: Arthur Henderson
                            * 1935: Carl von Ossietzky
                            * 1936: Carlos Saavedra Lamas
                            * 1937: Robert Cecil
                            * 1938: Nansen International Office for Refugees
                            * 1939
                            * 1940
                            * 1941
                            * 1942
                            * 1943
                            * 1944: International Committee of the Red Cross
                            * 1945: Cordell Hull
                            * 1946: Emily Balch / John Mott
                            * 1947: Friends Service Council / American Friends Service Committee
                            * 1948
                            * 1949: John Boyd Orr
                            * 1950: Ralph Bunche
                    

1951–1975|

                    
                                                * 1951: Léon Jouhaux
                            * 1952: Albert Schweitzer
                            * 1953: George Marshall
                            * 1954: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
                            * 1955
                            * 1956
                            * 1957: Lester B. Pearson
                            * 1958: Georges Pire
                            * 1959: Philip Noel-Baker
                            * 1960: Albert Lutuli
                            * 1961: Dag Hammarskjöld
                            * 1962: Linus Pauling
                            * 1963: International Committee of the Red Cross / League of Red Cross Societies
                            * 1964: Martin Luther King Jr.
                            * 1965: UNICEF
                            * 1966
                            * 1967
                            * 1968: René Cassin
                            * 1969: International Labour Organization
                            * 1970: Norman Borlaug
                            * 1971: Willy Brandt
                            * 1972
                            * 1973: _Lê Đức Thọ (declined award)_ / Henry Kissinger
                            * 1974: Seán MacBride / Eisaku Satō
                            * 1975: Andrei Sakharov
                    

1976–2000|

                    
                                                * 1976: Betty Williams / Mairead Corrigan
                            * 1977: Amnesty International
                            * 1978: Anwar Sadat / Menachem Begin
                            * 1979: Mother Teresa
                            * 1980: Adolfo Pérez Esquivel
                            * 1981: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
                            * 1982: Alva Myrdal / Alfonso García Robles
                            * 1983: Lech Wałęsa
                            * 1984: Desmond Tutu
                            * 1985: International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War
                            * 1986: Elie Wiesel
                            * 1987: Óscar Arias
                            * 1988: UN Peacekeeping Forces
                            * 1989: Tenzin Gyatso (14th Dalai Lama)
                            * 1990: Mikhail Gorbachev
                            * 1991: Aung San Suu Kyi
                            * 1992: Rigoberta Menchú
                            * 1993: Nelson Mandela / F. W. de Klerk
                            * 1994: Shimon Peres / Yitzhak Rabin / Yasser Arafat
                            * 1995: Pugwash Conferences / Joseph Rotblat
                            * 1996: Carlos Belo / José Ramos-Horta
                            * 1997: International Campaign to Ban Landmines / Jody Williams
                            * 1998: John Hume / David Trimble
                            * 1999: Médecins Sans Frontières
                            * 2000: Kim Dae-jung
                    

2001–present|

                    
                                                * 2001: United Nations / Kofi Annan
                            * 2002: Jimmy Carter
                            * 2003: Shirin Ebadi
                            * 2004: Wangari Maathai
                            * 2005: International Atomic Energy Agency / Mohamed ElBaradei
                            * 2006: Grameen Bank / Muhammad Yunus
                            * 2007: Al Gore / Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
                            * 2008: Martti Ahtisaari
                            * 2009: Barack Obama
                            * 2010: Liu Xiaobo
                            * 2011: Ellen Johnson Sirleaf / Leymah Gbowee / Tawakkol Karman
                            * 2012: European Union
                            * 2013: Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
                            * 2014: Kailash Satyarthi / Malala Yousafzai
                            * 2015: Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet
                            * 2016: Juan Manuel Santos
                            * 2017: International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons
                            * 2018: Denis Mukwege / Nadia Murad
                    
                            * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

2007 Nobel Prize laureates

* * *

Chemistry|

Gerhard Ertl (Germany)

|

![Nobel

Prize.png](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/e/ed/Nobel_Prize.png/80px-

Nobel_Prize.png)

Literature|

                    
                                                * Doris Lessing (Zimbabwe, United Kingdom)
                    

Peace|

                    
                                                * Al Gore (United States)
                            * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
                    

Physics|

                    
                                                * Albert Fert (France)
                            * Peter Grünberg (Germany)
                    

Physiology or Medicine|

                    
                                                * Mario Capecchi (United States)
                            * Martin Evans (United Kingdom)
                            * Oliver Smithies (United States)
                    

Economic Sciences|

                    
                                                * Leonid Hurwicz (United States)
                            * Eric Maskin (United States)
                            * Roger Myerson (United States)
                    

Nobel Prize recipients

                    
                                        1990
                    91
                    92
                    93
                    94
                    95
                    96
                    97
                    98
                    99
                    2000
                    01
                    02
                    03
                    04
                    05
                    06
                    07
                    08
                    09
                    10
                    11
                    12
                    13
                    14
                    15
                    16
                    17
                    18
                    
                            * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

Global warming and climate change

* * *

|

Temperatures

* * *
                    
                                                * Brightness temperature
                            * Effective temperature
                            * Geologic record
                            * Hiatus
                            * Historical climatology
                            * Instrumental record
                            * Paleoclimatology
                            * Paleotempestology
                            * Proxy data
                            * Record of the past 1,000 years
                            * Satellite measurements
                    

|

Causes

* * *

| Anthropogenic  
(caused by human activity)|

                    
                                                * Attribution of recent climate change
                            * Aviation
                            * Biofuel
                            * Black carbon
                            * Carbon dioxide
                            * Deforestation
                            * Earth's energy budget
                            * Ecocide
                            * Fossil fuel
                            * Global dimming
                            * Global warming potential
                            * Greenhouse effect
                            * (Infrared window)
                            * Greenhouse gases
                            * Land use, land-use change, and forestry
                            * Radiative forcing
                            * Tropospheric ozone
                    

---|---  
Natural|

                    
                                                * Albedo
                            * Bond events
                            * Climate oscillations
                            * Climate sensitivity
                            * Cloud forcing
                            * Cosmic rays
                            * Feedbacks
                            * Glaciation
                            * Global cooling
                            * Milankovitch cycles
                            * Ocean variability
                              * AMO
                              * ENSO
                              * IOD
                              * PDO
                            * Orbital forcing
                            * Solar variation
                            * Volcanism
                    

Models|

                    
                                                * Global climate model
                    

|

History

* * *
                    
                                                * History of climate change science
                            * Atmospheric thermodynamics
                            * Svante Arrhenius
                            * James Hansen
                            * Charles David Keeling
                    

|

Opinion and climate change

* * *

| General|

                    
                                                * Environmental ethics
                            * Media coverage of climate change
                            * Public opinion on climate change
                            * (Popular culture)
                            * Scientific opinion on climate change
                            * Scientists who disagree with the mainstream assessment
                            * Climate change denial
                            * Global warming conspiracy theory
                    

---|---  
By country & region|

                    
                                                * Africa
                            * Arctic
                            * Argentina
                            * Australia
                            * Bangladesh
                            * Belgium
                            * Canada
                            * China
                            * Europe
                            * European Union
                            * Finland
                            * Grenada
                            * India
                            * Japan
                            * Luxembourg
                            * New Zealand
                            * Norway
                            * Russia
                            * Scotland
                            * South Korea
                            * Sweden
                            * Tuvalu
                            * United Kingdom
                            * United States
                    

|

Politics

* * *

|

                    
                                                * Clean Power Plan
                            * Climate change denial
                            * (Manufactured controversy)
                            * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
                            * March for Science
                            * People's Climate March
                            * United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC)
                            * Global climate regime
                    

* * *

|

Potential effects and issues

* * *

| General|

                    
                                                * Abrupt climate change
                            * Anoxic event
                            * Arctic dipole anomaly
                            * Arctic haze
                            * Arctic methane emissions
                            * Central American dry corridor
                            * Climate change and agriculture
                            * Climate change and ecosystems
                            * Climate change and gender
                            * Climate change and poverty
                            * Drought
                            * Economics of global warming
                            * Effects on plant biodiversity
                            * Effects on health
                            * Effects on humans
                            * Effects on marine mammals
                            * Environmental migrant
                            * Extinction risk from global warming
                            * Fisheries and climate change
                            * Forest dieback
                            * Industry and society
                            * Iris hypothesis
                            * Megadrought
                            * Ocean acidification
                            * Ozone depletion
                            * Physical impacts
                            * Polar stratospheric cloud
                            * Regime shift
                            * Retreat of glaciers since 1850
                            * Runaway climate change
                            * Sea level rise
                            * Season creep
                            * Shutdown of thermohaline circulation
                            * Surf breaks and waves
                    

---|---  
By country|

                    
                                                * Australia
                            * South Asia
                              * India
                              * Nepal
                            * United States
                    

|

Mitigation

* * *

| Kyoto Protocol|

                    
                                                * Clean Development Mechanism
                            * Joint Implementation
                            * Bali Road Map
                            * 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference
                    

---|---  
Governmental|

                    
                                                * European Climate Change Programme
                            * G8 Climate Change Roundtable
                            * United Kingdom Climate Change Programme
                            * Paris Agreement
                              * United States withdrawal
                            * Regional climate change initiatives in the United States
                            * List of climate change initiatives
                    

Emissions reduction|

                    
                                                * Carbon credit
                            * Carbon-neutral fuel
                            * Carbon offset
                            * Carbon tax
                            * Emissions trading
                            * Fossil fuel phase-out
                    

Carbon-free energy|

                    
                                                * Efficient energy use
                            * Renewable energy
                            * Low-carbon economy
                            * Nuclear power
                            * Carbon capture and storage
                    

Personal|

                    
                                                * Individual action on climate change
                            * Simple living
                    

Other|

                    
                                                * Carbon dioxide removal
                            * Carbon sink
                            * Climate action
                            * Climate Action Plan
                            * Climate change mitigation scenarios
                            * Climate engineering
                            * Individual and political action on climate change
                            * Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
                            * Reforestation
                            * Urban reforestation
                    

|

Proposed adaptations

* * *

| Strategies|

                    
                                                * Damming glacial lakes
                            * Desalination
                            * Drought tolerance
                            * Irrigation investment
                            * Rainwater storage
                            * Sustainable development
                            * Weather modification
                    

---|---  
Programmes|

                    
                                                * Land allocation decision support system
                    
                            * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Glossary
                            * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Index
                            * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Climate change
                            * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Global warming
                            * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal
                    
                            * v
                            * t
                            * e
                    

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2f/Flag_of_the_United_Nations.svg/23px-

Flag_of_the_United_Nations.svg.png) United Nations

* * *
                    
                                                * António Guterres, Secretary-General
                            * Amina J. Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General
                            * María Fernanda Espinosa, General Assembly President
                    

United Nations System|

| United Nations Charter|

                    
                                                * Preamble
                    

---|---  
Principal organs|

                    
                                                * Secretariat
                              * Secretary-General
                              * Deputy Secretary-General
                              * Under-Secretary-General
                            * General Assembly
                              * President
                            * International Court of Justice
                              * Statute
                            * Security Council
                              * Members
                            * Economic and Social Council
                              * President
                            * Trusteeship Council
                    

Secretariat Offices  
and Departments|

                    
                                                * Headquarters
                            * Envoy on Youth
                            * Spokesperson for the Secretary-General
                            * Geneva
                            * Palace of Nations
                            * Nairobi
                            * Vienna
                            * Economic and Social Affairs
                            * Political Affairs
                            * Public Information
                              * Dag Hammarskjöld Library
                            * Safety and Security
                            * Palestinian Rights
                            * Peacekeeping Operations
                            * Internal Oversight
                            * Legal Affairs
                            * Developing Countries
                            * Sport for Development and Peace
                            * Disarmament Affairs
                            * Outer Space Affairs
                            * Partnerships
                            * Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
                            * UN organizations by location
                            * United Nations Office for Developing Countries
                            * Sexual Violence in Conflict
                    

Programmes and  
specialized agencies

|

                    
                                                * Culture of peace
                            * FAO
                            * ICAO
                            * IFAD
                            * ILO
                            * IMO
                            * ITC
                            * IPCC
                            * IAEA
                            * MINURSO
                            * UNIDO
                            * ITU
                            * UNAIDS
                            * SCSL
                            * UNCTAD
                            * UNCITRAL
                            * UNCDF
                            * UNDG
                            * UNDP
                            * UNDPI
                            * UNDPKO
                              * peacekeeping
                            * UNEP
                              * OzonAction
                              * UNEP/GRID-Arendal
                              * UNEP-WCMC
                            * UNESCO
                            * UNFIP
                            * UNFPA
                            * UN-HABITAT
                            * OHCHR
                            * UNHCR
                            * UNHRC
                            * UNICEF
                            * UNICRI
                            * UNIDIR
                            * UNITAR
                            * UN-Oceans
                            * UNODC
                            * UNOPS
                            * UNOSAT
                            * UNRISD
                            * UNRWA
                            * UNSSC
                            * UNU
                              * UNU-OP
                              * UNU-CRIS
                            * UNV
                            * UN Women
                            * UNWTO
                            * UPU
                            * WFP
                            * WHO
                            * WIPO
                            * WMO
                    

Members and observers|

                    
                                                * Full members
                            * Founding members
                              * UNSC Permanent members
                            * Observers
                              * European Union
                    

History|

                    
                                                * League of Nations
                            * Four Policemen
                            * Declaration by United Nations
                            * Peacekeeping missions
                              * history
                              * timeline
                            * Universal Declaration of Human Rights
                              * Human Rights Day
                            * Enlargement
                    

Resolutions|

                    
                                                * Security Council vetoes
                            * General Assembly
                              * 66th
                              * 67th
                            * Security Council
                              * Cyprus
                              * Iran
                              * Iraq
                              * Israel
                              * Lebanon
                              * Nagorno-Karabakh
                              * North Korea
                              * Palestine
                              * Syria
                              * Western Sahara
                    

Elections|

                    
                                                * Secretary-General (2016)
                            * International Court of Justice 2011
                            * General Assembly President (2016)
                            * Security Council (2016)
                    

Related|

                    
                                                * Bretton Woods system
                            * Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
                            * Criticism
                            * _Delivering as One_
                            * Flag
                              * Honour Flag
                            * Four Nations Initiative
                            * Genocide Convention
                            * UN Global Compact
                            * International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
                            * International Criminal Court
                            * International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World
                            * International Years
                            * Interpreters
                            * UN laissez-passer
                            * Military Staff Committee
                            * Official languages
                            * Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
                            * Peacekeeping
                            * Ralph Bunche Park
                            * United Nations Postal Administration
                            * Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice
                            * Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Mandela Rules)
                            * Treaty Series
                            * UN Day
                            * Millennium Declaration
                              * Summit
                              * Development Goals
                            * Security Council veto power
                            * UN reform
                              * Security Council reform
                            * UN Art Collection
                            * UN Federal Credit Union
                            * UN Memorial Cemetery Korea
                            * Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
                            * _Woodrow Wilson Memorial_
                            * World Federation of United Nations Associations
                    

Other|

                    
                                                * Outline
                            * UN television film series (1964–1966)
                            * In popular culture
                            * Model UN
                    
                            * ![Aegopodium podagraria1 ies.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg/24px-Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg)Environment portal
                            * ![UN emblem blue.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ee/UN_emblem_blue.svg/24px-UN_emblem_blue.svg.png)United Nations portal
                            * ![Wind-turbine-icon.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ad/Wind-turbine-icon.svg/21px-Wind-turbine-icon.svg.png)Renewable energy portal
                            * ![Global Warming Map.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8c/Global_Warming_Map.jpg/24px-Global_Warming_Map.jpg)Global warming portal
                    

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

                    
                                                * BNE: XX254723
                            * BNF: cb123477650 (data)
                            * GND: 3001139-5
                            * ISNI: 0000 0001 2165 1919
                            * LCCN: n89126379
                            * NDL: 00272798
                            * NKC: ko2009541350
                            * NLA: 35825651
                            * SUDOC: 032449909
                            * ULAN: 500257036
                            * VIAF: 136641781
                            * WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 136641781
                    

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intergovernmental_Panel_on_Climate_Change&oldid=898792418"

Categories:

                    
                                                * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
                            * Climate change organizations
                            * Organizations awarded Nobel Peace Prizes
                            * United Nations Environment Programme
                            * Working groups
                            * World Meteorological Organization
                            * Environmental organizations established in 1988
                            * Scientific organizations established in 1988
                    

Hidden categories:

                    
                                                * CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown
                            * Articles with inconsistent citation formats
                            * Webarchive template wayback links
                            * All articles lacking reliable references
                            * Articles lacking reliable references from February 2010
                            * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
                            * Use dmy dates from September 2013
                            * Articles needing additional references from June 2016
                            * All articles needing additional references
                            * Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2019
                            * All Wikipedia articles in need of updating
                            * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2011
                            * All articles with unsourced statements
                            * Articles with unsourced statements from July 2009
                            * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2013
                            * Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with ULAN identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
                            * Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers
                    

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

                    
                                                * Not logged in
                            * Talk
                            * Contributions
                            * Create account
                            * Log in
                    

### Namespaces

                    
                                                * Article
                            * Talk
                    

### Variants

### Views

                    
                                                * Read
                            * Edit
                            * View history
                    

### More

### Search

### Navigation

                    
                                                * Main page
                            * Contents
                            * Featured content
                            * Current events
                            * Random article
                            * Donate to Wikipedia
                            * Wikipedia store
                    

### Interaction

                    
                                                * Help
                            * About Wikipedia
                            * Community portal
                            * Recent changes
                            * Contact page
                    

### Tools

                    
                                                * What links here
                            * Related changes
                            * Upload file
                            * Special pages
                            * Permanent link
                            * Page information
                            * Wikidata item
                            * Cite this page
                    

### In other projects

                    
                                                * Wikimedia Commons
                    

### Print/export

                    
                                                * Create a book
                            * Download as PDF
                            * Printable version
                    

### Languages

                    
                                                * Afrikaans
                            * العربية
                            * Bân-lâm-gú
                            * Беларуская
                            * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
                            * Български
                            * Català
                            * Čeština
                            * Dansk
                            * Deutsch
                            * Eesti
                            * Ελληνικά
                            * Español
                            * Esperanto
                            * Euskara
                            * فارسی
                            * Føroyskt
                            * Français
                            * Gaeilge
                            * 한국어
                            * हिन्दी
                            * Hrvatski
                            * Bahasa Indonesia
                            * Italiano
                            * עברית
                            * Jawa
                            * ಕನ್ನಡ
                            * ქართული
                            * Kurdî
                            * Latina
                            * Lietuvių
                            * Magyar
                            * മലയാളം
                            * Bahasa Melayu
                            * Nederlands
                            * 日本語
                            * Norsk
                            * Norsk nynorsk
                            * Plattdüütsch
                            * Polski
                            * Português
                            * Română
                            * Русский
                            * Sicilianu
                            * Simple English
                            * Slovenčina
                            * Slovenščina
                            * Soomaaliga
                            * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
                            * Suomi
                            * Svenska
                            * ไทย
                            * Türkçe
                            * Українська
                            * اردو
                            * Tiếng Việt
                            * 粵語
                            * 中文
                    

Edit links

                    
                                                * This page was last edited on 25 May 2019, at 23:33 (UTC).
                            * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
                            * Privacy policy
                            * About Wikipedia
                            * Disclaimers
                            * Contact Wikipedia
                            * Developers
                            * Cookie statement
                            * Mobile view
                            * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
                            * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

