

Skip to main content

The Guardian - Back to home

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe Contribute

Search jobs

Sign in My account

                    
                                                * Comments & replies 
                            * Public profile 
                            * Account details 
                            * Emails & marketing
                    

* * *
                    
                                                * Membership 
                            * Contributions 
                            * Subscriptions
                    

* * *
                    
                                                * Sign out
                    

Search

                    
                                                * switch to the  International edition 
                            * switch to the  UK edition 
                            * switch to the  US edition 
                            * switch to the  Australia edition
                    

current edition: International edition

                    
                                                * News 
                            * Opinion 
                            * Sport 
                            * Culture 
                            * Lifestyle
                    

Show More __

                    
                                                * __News
                              * World news 
                              * UK news 
                              * Science 
                              * Cities 
                              * Global development 
                              * Football 
                              * Tech 
                              * Business 
                              * Environment 
                              * Obituaries 
                            * __Opinion
                              * The Guardian view 
                              * Columnists 
                              * Cartoons 
                              * Opinion videos 
                              * Letters 
                            * __Sport
                              * Football 
                              * Cricket 
                              * Rugby union 
                              * Tennis 
                              * Cycling 
                              * F1 
                              * Golf 
                              * US sports 
                            * __Culture
                              * Books 
                              * Music 
                              * TV & radio 
                              * Art & design 
                              * Film 
                              * Games 
                              * Classical 
                              * Stage 
                            * __Lifestyle
                              * Fashion 
                              * Food 
                              * Recipes 
                              * Love & sex 
                              * Health & fitness 
                              * Home & garden 
                              * Women 
                              * Men 
                              * Family 
                              * Travel 
                              * Money
                    

What term do you want to search? __ Search with google

                    
                                                * Make a contribution 
                            * Subscribe 
                            * __International edition
                              * switch to the  UK edition 
                              * switch to the  US edition 
                              * switch to the  Australia edition 
                            * Search jobs 
                            * Dating 
                            * Holidays 
                            * Digital Archive 
                            * Discount Codes 
                            * The Guardian app 
                            * Video 
                            * Podcasts 
                            * Pictures 
                            * Newsletters 
                            * Today's paper 
                            * Inside the Guardian 
                            * The Observer 
                            * Guardian Weekly 
                            * Crosswords 
                            * Facebook 
                            * Twitter 
                            * Search jobs 
                            * Dating 
                            * Holidays 
                            * Digital Archive 
                            * Discount Codes
                    
                            * Environment 
                            * Climate change 
                            * Wildlife 
                            * Energy 
                            * Pollution
                    

More

Environment

# Bush kills global warming treaty

Special report: George Bush's America  
Special report: global warming

Julian Borger in Washington

Thu 29 Mar 2001 09.28 BST First published on Thu 29 Mar 2001 09.28 BST

                    
                                                * Share on Facebook
                            * Share on Twitter
                            * Share via Email
                    

The Bush administration yesterday appeared to end all hope of reviving the
Kyoto treaty on global warming, declaring it had "no interest" in its
implementation and taking the first steps towards withdrawing the US signature
on the accord.

Kyoto's death warrant, announced by Christine Todd Whitman, head of the
environmental protection agency (EPA), represented a blunt rebuff to European
hopes of establishing a global programme to slow down the emission of
greenhouse gases, amid startling new evidence of rapid climate change. A UN
panel of scientists assessing the threat recently reported that average
temperatures could rise by up to 5.8 degrees celsius this century without a
serious effort to curb emissions.

The former vice-president Al Gore signed the Kyoto accord on behalf of the US,
but it was never ratified by the Senate. A state department official yesterday
confirmed a report in the Washington Post that the new administration had
asked the state department to explore ways of formally withdrawing the US
signature from the document.

Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, privately told European
ambassadors last week that the US considered the Kyoto accord "dead", but the
German chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, had hoped to convince Mr Bush not to
abandon the agreement altogether when the two leaders meet today in
Washington.

"It is important that the US accepts its responsibility for the world climate.
They are the biggest economy in the world and the heaviest energy consumers,"
Mr Schröder told the Los Angeles Times.

Ms Whitman's remarks represent a snub to the German chancellor on the eve of
his arrival. Asked whether the Kyoto deal had any chance of survival, she told
journalists: "No, we have no interest in implementing that treaty."

In a letter to Republican senators earlier this month, Mr Bush said he opposed
the Kyoto deal - under which the US would have to reduce the emission of
greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane by 7% below 1990 levels by
2012 - because it exempted developing countries and would harm the US economy.
He said he would not impose controls on emissions of carbon dioxide, despite
an election pledge to do so.

A European diplomat called the hardline attitude depressing and marked a
significant divergence between European and US views on how to deal with the
problem. It cast a pall over an international meeting in Bonn in June, where a
fresh attempt is to be made to establish a consensus.

European leaders had been hopeful that the 1997 treaty could be salvaged after
Ms Whitman came to the G8 environment summit in Trieste and signed a joint
statement on March 4 which said: "We commit ourselves to strive to reach
agreement on outstanding political issues and to ensure in a cost-effective
manner the environmental integrity of the Kyoto protocol."

Ms Whitman attempted to persuade Mr Bush to support an international agreement
on global warming. In a memorandum to the White House obtained by the
Guardian, her office said such a treaty would "begin to create some certainty
that climate change is a lasting policy issue".

The White House's stance represents a serious defeat for Ms Whitman and the
treasury secretary, Paul O'Neill. In a memo for Mr Bush on February 27, Mr
O'Neill said that the accumulation of greenhouse gases was "a very big
problem" and that the emissions controls laid down in the Kyoto treaty did not
go far enough.

Amy Kreider, director of the global warming campaign at the US National
Environmental Trust, said: "This is no way to conduct policy.

"It looks like amateur hour at the White House as regards foreign policy."

Topics

                    
                                                * Environment
                    
                            * Transport policy 
                            * Climate change
                    
                            * Share on Facebook
                            * Share on Twitter
                            * Share via Email
                            * Share on LinkedIn
                            * Share on Pinterest
                            * Share on WhatsApp
                            * Share on Messenger
                    
                            * Reuse this content
                    

## Most popular

                    
                                                * Environment 
                            * Climate change 
                            * Wildlife 
                            * Energy 
                            * Pollution
                    
                            * Contact us
                            * Complaints & corrections
                            * SecureDrop
                            * Work for us
                            * Privacy policy
                            * Cookie policy
                            * Terms & conditions
                            * Help
                            * All topics
                            * All writers
                            * Digital newspaper archive
                            * Facebook
                            * Twitter
                            * Advertise with us
                            * Search UK jobs
                            * Dating
                            * Discount Codes
                    

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe

Back to top

© 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights
reserved.

Close

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pvg.gif)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035250&cv=2.0&cj=1&comscorekw=Environment%2CUS+news%2CTransport+policy%2CPolitics%2CClimate+change%2CWorld+news)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/971225648/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pv.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

