

Loading...

![WeForest](https://www.weforest.org/sites/default/files/WF_Logo-500px-

RGB_2_1.jpg)

__

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Why and How __
                              * Why it matters
                              * Challenge
                              * Solution
                              * Contribution to SDGs
                              * Approach
                            * Projects __
                              * Projects
                              * Brazil
                              * India
                              * Zambia Luanshya
                              * Tanzania
                              * Ethiopia Seret
                              * Ethiopia Desa'a
                              * Ethiopia Amhara
                            * Partners
                            * Science __
                              * Science
                              * Research themes __
                                * Forest, water and climate change
                                * Forest restoration impacts
                                * FLR QUALITY FRAMEWORK
                              * Science Partners
                              * Latest science Publications
                              * Latest Science News
                              * Collaborators
                            * About __
                              * About us
                              * Why WeForest
                              * Who We Are
                              * Work with us
                              * WeForest in the Media
                              * FAQ
                              * General T&C;
                            * Engage __
                              * Tree planting
                              * CSR
                              * Carbon Offset
                              * Scientific Research
                            * Jobs
                            * Library __
                              * Video
                              * Annual Reports
                              * Brochures
                              * Publications
                              * Climate news
                            * News __
                              * News
                              * Featured
                              * Project Updates
                              * Science Publications
                            * Contact
                            * Donate __
                              * Paypal
                              * Bank transfer
                              * Tax efficient payment
                              * Global Giving
                            *
                    

27 June 2017

Environmental News

# What is the link between bees and reforestation ?

Everyone knows that bees play a vital role in pollination. Indeed, 80 % of
flowering plants depend upon bees for pollination. And we all know that bees
feed on pollen and nectar from flowers – often prodigious quantities. One
honey bee can visit between 50 – 1,000 flowers in one trip. An average honey
bee colony, with 25,000 forager bees, each making 10 trips a day, will be able
to pollinate 250 million flowers per day ! Do the maths:it’s incredible ! But
did you know that pollen and nectar from trees can be a very important part of
their diet too, and that trees also depend on pollination from bees ? A study
in Ghana and Benin by the NGO ‘Bees for Development’ has showed that the yield
of Cashew nuts from the cashew tree were 2 to 3 times higher if honey bees
were raised near the trees. Just the presence of bees increased the
productivity of the cashew trees.

Did you also know that the entire annual production of Brazil nuts from Brazil
– 40,000 tonnes per year - is dependent upon a bee, the Euglossa bee ? And
that that bee is itself dependent upon a unique orchid species which is only
found in the rain forest. Without the bee, and without the orchid, entire
village communities whose lives depend on the collection and the sale of the
nuts would collapse. In fact the lives of bees and forests are intimately
linked. They have evolved together over millennia. Some forest bees don’t like
crossing open spaces. So when an area is deforested, the umbilical cord
between bees and forest can be broken. The forest islands lose their
pollinators, and are doomed. Thankfully, creation of wildlife corridors and
hedgerows can plug the pollination gap and allow the bee to survive.
Communities that depend upon forest products for their livelihoods know that
bees are important not only for ecological reasons, but they can generate
significant resources for the sale of highly nutritious honey.

WeForest and other NGOs involved in forest conservation are increasingly
looking at honey production as an important income earner. Some NGOs – such as
Bees Abroad – are involved in extensive beekeeper training programmes across
Africa and Asia to promote honey production. Schools are often targeted as
potential sites for teaching bee-keeping. Look at their website – it’s packed
with information on their programmes in Cameroun, Kenya, Uganda, Malawi,
Zimbabwe and many other countries. For those who are fascinated by the life of
honeybees and their extraordinary adaptations and communication mechanisms,
you should look at an amazing book by Thomas Seeley called Honeybee Democracy.
You won’t be able to put it down ! Help WeForest conserve Bees and Trees. It
makes perfect sense.

                    
                                                * ![Alt](https://www.weforest.org/sites/default/files/styles/blog__1140xauto_/public/Beehive.jpg?itok=WGDGj8ot)
                    

Read more news

![Alt](https://www.weforest.org/sites/default/files/styles/medium/public/WF_Logo_White%20and%20Colour_0.png?itok=C0DVtmqx)

# Contact us

                    
                                                * **Headquarters ** (BE) **  • **WeForest ASBL/VZW
                            * **France • ** WeForest France
                            * **USA** **•  **WeForest Inc
                            * **Ethiopia  ** **•  **WeForest charity
                            * **Zambia  ** **•  **WeForest charity
                    

# Follow us

* * *

Subscribe to the newsletter

## Search form

__

Data Privacy Policy • Web Terms & Conditions • Web design and development:
OpenForests

__

![](https://dc.ads.linkedin.com/collect/?pid=157858&fmt=gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

