

  *     *       *         *           *   * LATEST

  *     *       *         * Irish Catholic aid agency says Trump 'endangers people and planet'
    * Bishop bans Communion for abortion-rights supporters
    * Church must learn how to speak to young people, pope says
    * Pope names delegate for pastoral care of Lourdes pilgrims
    * Sri Lanka readies laws to curb hate speech, false news
  * 2019-06-07T01:44:44+02002019-06-07T01:38:28+02002019-06-06T21:52:10+02002019-06-06T21:48:31+02002019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

# ![logo](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Crux-TRY-2.png)

####

  * John L. Allen Jr.
  * Inés San Martin
  * Crux Staff
    * John L. Allen Jr.
    * Inés San Martín
    * Charles Collins
    * Claire Giangravè
    * Christopher White
    * Elise Harris
    * Fr Jeff Kirby
    * Nirmala Carvalho
    * Shannon Levitt
  * Categories
    * Vatican
    * Church in the US
    * Church in UK and Ireland
    * Church in the Americas
    * Church in Africa
    * Church in Asia/Oceania
    * Church in Europe
    * Interviews
  * Contact Us
    * Subscribe
    * Advertising

* * *

# Bush has been vindicated on stem cell decision

  * In Commentary
  * Christopher White

Aug 29, 2016

NATIONAL_CORRESPONDENT

    
    
    *     *     *     *     *     *     *
    

![Bush has been vindicated on stem cell decision](https://cruxnow.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/08/stem-cell.jpg)

(Credit: Shutterstock.)

##### Fifteen years ago this month, President George Bush imposed a moratorium

on federal funding for embryonic stem cell research. It was controversial at
the time, but in the years since the president's decision has been largely
vindicated.

### Commentary

Fifteen years ago this month, President George W. Bush announced he was
issuing a moratorium on the future spending of federal funds for embryonic
stem cell research. He would later refer to this as one of the most
consequential “Decision Points” (the title of his autobiography) of his
presidency.

While his presidential legacy is much debated, science has already vindicated
his decision to end the destruction of embryos and to pursue alternative
methods of medical advancement.

A brief science backgrounder: Despite public confusion, stem cells are _not_
embryos; they are the types of cells that can differentiate into one or more
of the types of cells of an organism’s body. Because of this, medical
researchers have long been eager to use stem cells to allow healthy new cells
to replace or repair damaged tissues and as a result, offer great promise for
individuals suffering from cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, Parkinson’s
disease, spinal cord injuries, and a range of other conditions.

The debate over stem cells concerns the derivation of them, namely whether or
not they require the destruction of human embryos or if they come from
elsewhere (such as adult stem cells) and to what extent they may or may not be
used for the purposes of regenerative medicine.

While critics of Bush’s policy were eager to label him as “anti-science,” tone
deaf, and unsympathetic to folks like Christopher Reeve (who they claimed
would be able to walk again with the aid of embryonic stem cells), other
prominent figures, including leading scientists and ethicists, urged both
caution in the destruction of life in its earliest stages and also pushed for
other means to be pursued that they believed could be just as effective.

That’s why when Bush made his decision, he also announced that he was doubling
federal funding for research to explore alternative methods—and in November
2007, James A. Thomson (along with Shinya Yamanaka), the same scientist to
first isolate human embryonic stem cells which sparked this whole debate,
announced that he discovered an “embryo-free way to produce genetically
matched stem cells.”

Writing in the _Washington Post_ at the time, Dr. Charles Krauthammer, a
handicapped doctor (who arguably had the most to gain from any advances from
embryonic stem cell therapy) and a one time critic of Bush’s policy,
proclaimed: “The verdict is clear: rarely has a president—so vilified for a
moral stance—been so thoroughly vindicated.”

Since that time, adult stem cells have been used to grow a beating heart, cure
cataracts and reverse blindness, and to treat numerous cancer patients and
support individuals with autoimmune diseases. To date, over 1.5 million people
have been treated using adult stem cell therapy.

But as Krauthammer also noted, Bush wasn’t vindicated simply for pushing for
scientific alternatives, but for his willingness to take a moral stand. “What
Bush got right was to insist, in the face of enormous popular and scientific
opposition, on drawing a line at all, on requiring that scientific imperative
be balanced by moral considerations,” he concluded.

Reflecting back on the great stem cell debate, we should pause and consider
the fact that too often we move full speed ahead because we _can_ do certain
things, before ever asking whether we _should_ be doing them in the first
place _._

Be it the creation of children intentionally severed from their parents via
anonymous egg and sperm donation, the growing industry of surrogacy where
women are reduced to their wombs and motherhood is turned into a market, or
the efforts to use the powers of medicine to kill those who are greatly
suffering, debates over these pressing issues in the field of bioethics strike
at the heart of what it means to be human.

As Bush did in 2001, he didn’t settle for a lowest common denominator public
policy approach, but instead, asked the nation to think fundamentally about
the question—and mystery—of human life, even in its nascent stages.

In his willingness to give pause and to probe the intricacies of this debate,
President Bush reminded us that something deeper is at stake beyond stem
cells: our very souls. Our national leaders would do well to ask these hard
questions more often and to make us do the same.

Share:

  *     *       *         *           *             *   * 

#### Related Posts

  * ![Society of Catholic Scientists meets in Chicago for first-ever conference](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/CyVtz0AWgAAAoZU-330x242.jpg)Society of Catholic Scientists meets in Chicago for first-ever conference
  * ![Colorado case spotlights divorce dilemma on frozen embryos](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/IVF-embryo-adoption-330x242.jpg)Colorado case spotlights divorce dilemma on frozen embryos
  * ![Should a head transplant be allowed to happen?](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Cattura-3-330x242.jpg)Should a head transplant be allowed to happen?

  * Life

  * President George Bush
  * Science
  * stem cells

  * Commentary

### Crux News. Anytime. Anywhere.

Sign up to get the latest Catholic news and stories delivered right to your
inbox.

  * *

This iframe contains the logic required to handle Ajax powered Gravity Forms.

#### Latest Stories

  * ![Irish Catholic aid agency says Trump ‘endangers people and planet’](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/trump-330x242.jpeg)

##### Irish Catholic aid agency says Trump 'endangers people and planet'

    
    
    * Charles Collins
    * Jun 7, 2019
    

  * ![Bishop bans Communion for abortion-rights supporters](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/2278fb110964f7ff622e19d12cec1b7a-330x242.jpeg)

##### Bishop bans Communion for abortion-rights supporters

    
    
    * John O'Connor
    * Jun 7, 2019
    

  * ![Church must learn how to speak to young people, pope says](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/20190606T1109-415-CNS-POPE-VOCATIONS-EUROPE_800-330x242.jpg)

##### Church must learn how to speak to young people, pope says

    
    
    * Junno Arocho Esteves
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Pope names delegate for pastoral care of Lourdes pilgrims](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/20190606T1048-27294-CNS-POPE-LOURDES-DELEGATE_800-330x242.jpg)

##### Pope names delegate for pastoral care of Lourdes pilgrims

    
    
    * Cindy Wooden
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Sri Lanka readies laws to curb hate speech, false news](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/800-330x242.jpeg)

##### Sri Lanka readies laws to curb hate speech, false news

    
    
    * Bharatha Mallawarachi
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Vatican News to launch news program, podcast in Latin](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/radio-330x242.jpg)

##### Vatican News to launch news program, podcast in Latin

    
    
    * Carol Glatz
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Catholic school worker charged with sex assault of student](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/squad-car-1209719_1280-330x242.jpg)

##### Catholic school worker charged with sex assault of student

    
    
    * Associated Press
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Pope to meet Putin before Vatican Ukraine meeting](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/0faf5ad72437f7a1ef24a5c518a5ac9d-330x242.jpeg)

##### Pope to meet Putin before Vatican Ukraine meeting

    
    
    * Nicole Winfield and Nataliya Vasilyeva
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![In recalling soldiers’ D-Day sacrifice, archbishop prays for world peace](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/soldier-330x242.jpeg)

##### In recalling soldiers’ D-Day sacrifice, archbishop prays for world peace

    
    
    * Elizabeth Bachmann
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Texas couple stands by story after US cardinal pushes back](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/09a32d8bbc7a21de5c6f6e39b5af0469-330x242.jpeg)

##### Texas couple stands by story after US cardinal pushes back

    
    
    * Nicole Winfield
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

#### Most Read

  * ![Bush has been vindicated on stem cell decision](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/squad-car-1209719_1280-510x187.jpg)

##### Catholic school worker charged with sex assault of student

    
    
    * Associated Press, Church in the US
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ##### Pope names delegate for pastoral care of Lourdes pilgrims

    * Catholic News Service, Church in Europe
    * Jun 6, 2019
  * ##### Cardinal Kasper says Francis will allow married priests, if bishops request it

    * Church in Europe
    * Jun 5, 2019
  * ##### Ex-seminarian’s struggle shows ‘overlapping jurisdictions’ gap in abuse crisis

    * Church in the US
    * Jun 6, 2019
  * ##### Taize superior says community has received five abuse allegations

    * Catholic News Service, Church in Europe
    * Jun 5, 2019

## Crux needs your monthly support

to keep delivering the best in smart, wired and independent Catholic news.

Support Crux

#### Latest Stories

  * ![Irish Catholic aid agency says Trump ‘endangers people and planet’](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/trump-100x100.jpeg)

##### Irish Catholic aid agency says Trump 'endangers people and planet'

    
    
    * Charles Collins
    * Jun 7, 2019
    

  * ![Bishop bans Communion for abortion-rights supporters](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/2278fb110964f7ff622e19d12cec1b7a-100x100.jpeg)

##### Bishop bans Communion for abortion-rights supporters

    
    
    * John O'Connor
    * Jun 7, 2019
    

  * ![Church must learn how to speak to young people, pope says](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/20190606T1109-415-CNS-POPE-VOCATIONS-EUROPE_800-100x100.jpg)

##### Church must learn how to speak to young people, pope says

    
    
    * Junno Arocho Esteves
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Pope names delegate for pastoral care of Lourdes pilgrims](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/20190606T1048-27294-CNS-POPE-LOURDES-DELEGATE_800-100x100.jpg)

##### Pope names delegate for pastoral care of Lourdes pilgrims

    
    
    * Cindy Wooden
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Sri Lanka readies laws to curb hate speech, false news](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/800-100x100.jpeg)

##### Sri Lanka readies laws to curb hate speech, false news

    
    
    * Bharatha Mallawarachi
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Vatican News to launch news program, podcast in Latin](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/radio-100x100.jpg)

##### Vatican News to launch news program, podcast in Latin

    
    
    * Carol Glatz
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Catholic school worker charged with sex assault of student](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/squad-car-1209719_1280-100x100.jpg)

##### Catholic school worker charged with sex assault of student

    
    
    * Associated Press
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Pope to meet Putin before Vatican Ukraine meeting](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/0faf5ad72437f7a1ef24a5c518a5ac9d-100x100.jpeg)

##### Pope to meet Putin before Vatican Ukraine meeting

    
    
    * Nicole Winfield and Nataliya Vasilyeva
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

Share:

  *     *       *         *           *             *   * 

#### Related Posts

  * ![Society of Catholic Scientists meets in Chicago for first-ever conference](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/CyVtz0AWgAAAoZU-330x242.jpg)Society of Catholic Scientists meets in Chicago for first-ever conference
  * ![Colorado case spotlights divorce dilemma on frozen embryos](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/IVF-embryo-adoption-330x242.jpg)Colorado case spotlights divorce dilemma on frozen embryos
  * ![Should a head transplant be allowed to happen?](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/Cattura-3-330x242.jpg)Should a head transplant be allowed to happen?

#### Quick Links

Knights of Columbus DeSales Media Group in the Diocese of Brooklyn Angelus
News The Catholic Channel on Sirius XM Catholic Standard Catholic TV

#### About Crux

We’re a news site dedicated to offering the very best in smart, wired and
independent coverage of the Vatican and the Catholic Church.

#### Connect with us

  *     *       *         *           * 

#### Latest

  * ![Single Post Template](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/trump-100x100.jpeg)

##### Irish Catholic aid agency says Trump 'endangers people and planet'

    
    
    * Church in UK and Ireland
    * Jun 7, 2019
    

  * ![Single Post Template](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/2278fb110964f7ff622e19d12cec1b7a-100x100.jpeg)

##### Bishop bans Communion for abortion-rights supporters

    
    
    * Associated Press, Church in the US
    * Jun 7, 2019
    

  * ![Single Post Template](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/20190606T1109-415-CNS-POPE-VOCATIONS-EUROPE_800-100x100.jpg)

##### Church must learn how to speak to young people, pope says

    
    
    * Catholic News Service, Vatican
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Single Post Template](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/20190606T1048-27294-CNS-POPE-LOURDES-DELEGATE_800-100x100.jpg)

##### Pope names delegate for pastoral care of Lourdes pilgrims

    
    
    * Catholic News Service, Church in Europe
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * ![Single Post Template](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/800-100x100.jpeg)

##### Sri Lanka readies laws to curb hate speech, false news

    
    
    * Associated Press, Church in Asia
    * Jun 6, 2019
    

  * #### About Crux

  * #### Contact Us

  * #### Advertising

  * #### Privacy

  * #### Cookies

Top

© 2019 Crux Catholic Media Inc. ![LBC-Round-Logo](https://cruxnow.com/wp-

content/uploads/2016/05/LBC-Round-Logo.png)

Crux needs your monthly support to keep delivering the best in smart, wired
and independent Catholic news. Support Us

![Close](https://cruxnow.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Group-1191.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

