

Your browser does not support inline frames

                    
                                                *             *             * Skip to main content
                    

![weather conditions:

cloudy](https://kpbs.media.clients.ellingtoncms.com/static/kpbs/images/weather/small/cloudy.png)
70° Partly Cloudy

![KPBS

logo](https://kpbs.media.clients.ellingtoncms.com/static/kpbs/images/base/KPBS_RGB.png)

                    
                                                * LISTEN LIVE
                            * WATCH SHOWS
                            * GIVE NOW
                            * Search Input Field
                            * news
                    
                            * arts & living
                    
                            * programming & schedules
                    
                            * support KPBS
                    
                            * events
                    

Search Input Field

                    
                                                * Latest News
                            * Local:news
                            * National:news
                            * Weather :news
                            * Surf :news
                            * Special News Sections
                            * KPBS Evening Edition :program
                            * KPBS Midday Edition :program
                            * KPBS Roundtable :program
                            * Election
                            * Speak City Heights
                            * KPBS Investigates
                            * California Dream
                            * News Sections
                            * Border:news
                            * Economy:news
                            * Education:news
                            * Environment:news
                            * Military:news
                            *  
                            * North County:news
                            * Politics:news
                            * Public Safety:news
                            * Quality of Life:news
                            * Science:news
                    
                            * Blogs/Podcasts
                            * Cinema Junkie Podcast :program
                            * Cinema Junkie Blog :blog
                            * KPBS/Arts Blog :blog
                            * Only Here :program
                            * More Podcasts :podcasts
                            * Special Sections
                            * Events Calendar
                            * KPBS/Arts Calendar
                            * Community Heroes
                            * One Book One San Diego
                            * Arts & Living Sections
                            * All Arts & Culture
                            * All Living
                            * Animal Stories
                            * Books:news
                            * Faith & Spirituality
                            * Food
                            *  
                            * Movies:news
                            * Music:news
                            * Pop Culture:news
                            * Television :news
                            * Visual Arts :news
                            * Theatre :news
                    
                            * KPBS Radio
                            * Listen Live
                            * Radio Schedule
                            * Radio Programs
                            * Podcasts
                            * Classical San Diego
                            * Radio Reading Service
                            * KPBS TV
                            * TV on Demand
                            * TV Schedules
                            * Program Highlights
                            * KPBS Passport
                            * TV Highlights Newsletter
                            * Local Programs
                            * KPBS Evening Edition :program
                            * KPBS Midday Edition :program
                            * KPBS Roundtable :program
                            * KPBS/arts :program
                            * A Growing Passion :program
                            * Animal R&R :program
                            * Crossing South :program
                            * Explore San Diego :program
                            *  
                            * Ken Kramer's About San Diego :program
                            * Kings of the Craft:program
                            * Live at the Belly Up:program
                            * RE'FLECT:program
                            * San Diego's Historic Places :program
                            * Savor San Diego :program
                            * SnapShot :program
                    
                            * Membership Links
                    

**

                    
                                                * Join or Renew
                            * Membership Information
                            * Sustaining Membership
                            * Matching Gift
                            * Membership FAQs
                    

**

                    
                                                *  
                            * Producers Club :join
                            * KPBS Passport
                            * Other Ways to Give
                            * Planned Giving
                            * Vehicle Donation
                            * Corporate Support
                            * Volunteer
                            * Contact Us
                            * Call 619-594-6983
                            * Send an email
                            * Toll free: 888-399-5727
                    
                            *             *             * # You Probably Have Eco Anxiety, You Just Don’t Know It
                    

Tuesday, August 29, 2017

Ashley Ahearn / KUOW

![Ashley Ahearn, host of terrestrial, a new national podcast produced out of

KU...](https://kpbs.media.clients.ellingtoncms.com/img/photos/2017/08/29/anx1_t800.jpg?90232451fbcadccc64a17de7521d859a8f88077d)

Photo by Melanie Moore / KUOW

Above: Ashley Ahearn, host of terrestrial, a new national podcast produced out
of KUOW in Seattle is shown in this undated photo.

_Subscribe to terrestrial inApple Podcasts._

When I first heard the term eco-anxiety — a chronic fear of environmental doom
— I brushed it off. It seemed like something for people who sit on yoga mats
and worry about how the world is going to end because we’re not recycling
enough.

But it turns out there’s more to the relationship between our brains and the
environment.

As the effects of climate change get worse, psychologists are finding that
it’s making people more stressed and therefore more likely to develop anxiety
disorders, post-traumatic stress, depression and problems with substance
abuse.

In the U.S., psychologists saw those kinds of reactions immediately after
Hurricane Katrina and superstorm Sandy. And in Australia, they saw it during
the Millennium drought that went on for more than a decade.

In the first episode of my new podcast terrestrial, I spoke with Jenny
O’Connell, a clinical social worker who treats farmers in a rural community
two hours outside of Melbourne.

“It’s been farmers killing their stock, and it’s been farmers in denial not
knowing what to do,” she told me. “Some of those people have either succeeded
or attempted to take their lives.”

And of course, the psychological burden is many, many times worse for people
who are directly affected.

A recent study from the American Psychological Association found evidence that
low-income communities and people of color suffer most from eco-anxiety. Take
Hurricane Katrina. Among a sample of people affected, suicide or suicidal
ideation more than doubled. And according to the study, 49 percent developed
an anxiety or mood disorder such as depression.

But even for those of us who see these events unfold on social media, our
brains perceive a very real threat — unlike anything our species has dealt
with before. And given how the human brain is wired, we just aren’t built to
handle it.

In this episode, we’ll also follow Seattle filmmaker Chris Jordan’s journey to
an island in the South Pacific to confront the effects of plastic pollution on
the Laysan Albatross.

Here's the devastating thing about these albatrosses: The plastic pollution we
put into the ocean winds up in their bodies. When Jordan learned about the
birds, he felt a pull to visit. He ended up traveling to Midway Atoll eight
times.

“I would open up a bird and take out a handful of bottle caps, and I would
just dissolve into tears of grief," he said.

![This undated photo shows the effects of plastic

pollution...](https://kpbs.media.clients.ellingtoncms.com/img/photos/2017/08/29/anx3_t600.jpg?4326734cdb8e39baa3579048ef63ad7b451e7676)

Photo credit: Chris Jordan

This undated photo shows the effects of plastic pollution on albatrosses in
the South Pacific.

When he returned from his first trip to Midway, he sank into a year of
depression. "I felt like I was too small to make a difference,” he said.

But Jordan returned to Midway, because he knew he needed the full story of
these birds. And something surprising happened. He was able to face his grief,
allowing it to roll through him, which resulted in a feeling he describes as
ecstasy.

“Grief is the love we feel for something we're losing or that is suffering,”
Jordan told me. “It brings us so deeply into the present moment and it
connects us with our love for whatever that thing is.”

He still worries, of course, about where we’re headed and what we’re doing to
the planet.

"For me, it's important to not kind of pacify myself or convince myself that
I'm doing enough,” he said. “I want to feel my anxiety."

Because addressing that anxiety is the first step to moving beyond it and
getting to work.

Want more KPBS news?  
Find us on Twitter and Facebook, or sign up for our newsletters. + Subscribe
to our podcasts

To view PDF documents, Download Acrobat Reader.

## More Like This

                    
                                                * ![From Gloom To Gratitude: 8 Skills To Cultivate Joy](https://kpbs.media.clients.ellingtoncms.com/assets/img/2019/05/03/caretaker-self-care_wide-21f9826f63c5459b7362bf73eb155031414fdb62_t300x200.jpeg?dc8eab274d465fa9c22e11d3bf7b19f7f0284473)
                    

### From Gloom To Gratitude: 8 Skills To Cultivate Joy

May. 5, 2019

                    
                                                * ![Podcast Episode 164: Dissecting 'Us'](https://kpbs.media.clients.ellingtoncms.com/img/news/tease/2019/03/29/2511_D009_00021R_t300x200.JPG?dc8eab274d465fa9c22e11d3bf7b19f7f0284473)
                    

### Podcast Episode 164: Dissecting 'Us'

Mar. 29, 2019

                    
                                                * ![A Rise In Depression Among Teens And Young Adults Could B...](https://kpbs.media.clients.ellingtoncms.com/assets/img/2019/03/13/gettyimages-1126205565_wide-15d77e6849d5ef8078e56554e095eb3724c26e5b_t300x200.jpg?dc8eab274d465fa9c22e11d3bf7b19f7f0284473)
                    

### A Rise In Depression Among Teens And Young Adults Could Be Linked To

Social Media Use

Mar. 14, 2019

## Latest News

                    
                                                * ![New Date Set For Navy SEAL Murder Trial](https://kpbs.media.clients.ellingtoncms.com/img/photos/2019/05/31/IMG_20190530_173625_t300x200.jpg?dc8eab274d465fa9c22e11d3bf7b19f7f0284473)
                    

### New Date Set For Navy SEAL Murder Trial

                    
                                                * ![San Diego Considers Creating New Position To Improve Chil...](https://kpbs.media.clients.ellingtoncms.com/img/photos/2019/06/06/Capture3_t300x200.PNG?dc8eab274d465fa9c22e11d3bf7b19f7f0284473)
                    

### San Diego Considers Creating New Position To Improve Childcare Access

                    
                                                * ![San Diego Mayor Meets With Other North American Mayors In...](https://kpbs.media.clients.ellingtoncms.com/img/photos/2019/06/06/AP_19151801713119_t300x200.jpg?dc8eab274d465fa9c22e11d3bf7b19f7f0284473)
                    

### San Diego Mayor Meets With Other North American Mayors In Mexico

**SPONSORSHIP**

**Become a KPBS sponsor today!**

Tweets by KPBSnews

**SPONSORSHIP**

**Become a KPBS sponsor today!**

### About Us

                    
                                                * Our Mission
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Terms of Service
                            * Tour KPBS
                            * Staff
                            * KPBS Press Releases
                            * KPBS Financial Information
                            * Careers & FCC EEO Regulations
                            * FCC Public Files KPBS-DT
                            * FCC Public Files KPBS-FM
                            * FCC Public Files KQVO-FM
                    

### Help/FAQ

                    
                                                * Frequently Asked Questions
                            * Log-ins FAQ
                            * Member Services
                            * Mobile Apps
                            * Feedback
                            * Closed Captioning
                    

### Give

                    
                                                * Pledge/Join/Renew
                            * Producers Club  :join
                            * Planned Giving
                            * Vehicle Donation
                            * Corporate Support
                            * Volunteer
                    

### Contact Us

                    
                                                * KPBS Public Media
                    

5200 Campanile Drive  
San Diego, CA 92182

                    
                                                * [map and directions]
                            * General: 619-594-1515
                            * Newsroom: 619-594-6397
                            * Toll free: 888-399-5727
                            * Send us a message
                            * To view PDF files, download Acrobat Reader.
                    
                            *             *             *             *             * Sign up for our newsletters!
                    

© 2019 KPBS Public Media

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

