

Skip to main content

# Union of Concerned Scientists

# ![Union of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-
ucs.png)

en español __

## Search form

Search

## Main Menu

                    
                                                * Our Work
                              * Clean Energy
                              * Clean Vehicles
                              * Food & Agriculture
                              * Global Warming
                              * Nuclear Power
                              * Nuclear Weapons
                              * Center for Science and Democracy
                            * About
                              * Accomplishments & History
                              * Leadership & Experts
                              * Funding & Financials
                              * Ways to Give
                              * News Center
                              * Jobs at UCS
                              * Contact Us
                              * The UCS Store: Say It With Science!
                            * Take Action
                              * Science Network
                            * Subscribe
                            * Donate
                              * Renew Your Membership
                              * Become a Member
                              * Give Monthly
                              * Make a Planned Gift
                              * More Ways to Give
                              * Gifts in Honor or Memory
                              * Gift Memberships
                            * Science Network Leaders
                    

**search**

![Scientist studying Arctic sea

ice](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/herospace/public/images/2014/08/gw-

science-scientist-in-arctic-ice.jpg?itok=uWN-hkWq)

Photo: NOAA/Flickr

# Global Warming Science

The science is clear. Global warming is happening.  
We are the primary cause.

## You are here

                    
                                                1. Global Warming
                    

Scientists know that certain gases trap heat and act like a blanket to warm
the planet. One of the most important is carbon dioxide (CO2), which we
release into the atmosphere when we burn fossil fuels — oil, coal, and natural
gas — to generate electricity, power our vehicles, and heat our homes.

As we overload our atmosphere with carbon dioxide, more and more heat is
trapped — and Earth steadily warms up in response. How do we know? The
scientific evidence is overwhelming.

## The planet's temperature is rising

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2018/05/1200-hotsun.jpg)

Photo: Nomad Tales/Flickr

Trends in temperature readings from around the world show that global warming
is taking place.

Every one of the past 40 years has been warmer than the 20th century average.
2016 was the hottest year on record. The 12 warmest years on record have all
occurred since 1998.

Over the past 130 years, the global average temperature has increased 1.5
degrees Fahrenheit, with more than half of that increase occurring over only
the past 35 years.

**Learn more:**

                    
                                                * Global Warming FAQ
                            * Ten Signs of Global Warming
                            * The Planet's Temperature Is Rising
                            * Does Snow and Cold Weather Disprove Climate Change?
                    

## Carbon dioxide levels are increasing in the atmosphere

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2018/05/1200-darkclouds.jpg)

Detailed measurements of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels have been
taken continuously since the late 1950s. The data show that CO2 levels have
steadily increased every year. In 2017, they were 28 percent higher than in
1959, the year CO2 measurements began at the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii.

What's more, scientists have detailed records of past CO2 levels from ice core
studies, which show that CO2 levels are higher today than at least any point
in the last 800,000 years.

## Increased CO2 is the primary driver of global warming

![hot sun over

skyscrapers](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

impacts-heat-hot-sun-and-skyscrapers.jpg?itok=1WA6PEKB)

CO2 absorbs heat reflected from the Earth’s surface — heat that would
otherwise pass freely into space. The CO2 then releases that heat, warming the
Earth’s atmosphere .

As CO2 levels increase, the pace of warming accelerates. Satellite
measurements confirm that less heat is escaping the atmosphere today than 40
years ago. Though other heat-trapping gases also play a role, CO2 is the
primary contributor to global warming.

The climate has changed many times in the geologic past due to natural causes
— including volcanic activity, changes in the sun’s intensity, fluctuations in
Earth's orbit, and other factors — but none of these can account for the
current rise in global temperatures.

**Learn more:**

                    
                                                * Why does CO2 get most of the attention when there are so many other heat-trapping gases?
                            * Air Pollution, Aerosols, and Global Warming
                            * Ozone Hole & Global Warming
                            * Sun's Effect on Climate
                    

## We are responsible for the increase in CO 2

![Coal power plant

smokestacks](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/energy-

coal-power-plant-smokestacks-with-tailings.jpg?itok=CDqYWOmV)

_Photo: alohaspirit/iStock_

Scientists can conclusively identify that human activity is responsible for
the observed increase in CO2. How? The carbon dioxide emitted by burning coal,
natural gas, and oil has a unique chemical “fingerprint" — and the additional
CO2 in the atmosphere bears that signature.

**Learn more:**

                    
                                                * How Do We Know that Humans Are the Major Cause of Global Warming?
                            * Tracing Who's Responsible for Temperature Increase and Sea Level Rise (2017) 
                            * Largest Producers of Industrial Carbon Emissions
                            * Each Country's Share of CO2 Emissions
                    

## An overwhelming majority of scientists agree

![IPCC

Meeting](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

science-ipcc-38th-session-japan.jpg?itok=3spv9eA-)

_Photo: Yoshikazu Tsuno/AFP_

Scientific societies and scientists have released numerous statements and
studies showing the overwhelming consensus that global warming is happening
and that human activity is the primary cause.

**Learn more:**

                    
                                                * Scientists Agree: Global Warming is Happening. Humans are the Primary Cause
                    

## The consequences of rising temperatures

![Flooded

houses](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

impacts-flooding-flooded-houses.jpg?itok=pxaOuRgE)

_Photo: Brisbane/Shutterstock_

Global warming has serious implications for our health, environment, and
economy. Dangerous heat waves are increasing in severity and frequency. Sea
level rise is accelerating. Extreme rainfall are on the rise in some areas.
More severe droughts are occurring in others. Collectively, these effects pose
a threat to the entire planet — including you, your community, and your
family.

**Learn more:**

                    
                                                * Global Warming Impacts
                    

## The National Climate Assessment

![map of projected precipitation

increase](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

science-nca-projected-north-america-precipitation-

increase-a2_precip_Ann_cbar_1070.jpg?itok=xnGr6GcH)_Image: Greg Shirah_

Produced on a regular basis by the U.S. Global Change Research Program, the
National Climate Assessment provides a comprehensive assessment of the current
understanding of climate science, including an overview of likely impacts in
the United States on a region-by-region basis.

## The IPCC

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was established in 1988
by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) to assess climate change based on the latest
science.

Through the IPCC, thousands of experts from around the world synthesize the
most recent developments in climate science, adaptation, vulnerability, and
mitigation every five to seven years.

The IPCC has issued comprehensive assessments in 1990, 1996, 2001, 2007 and
2013, plus methodology reports, technical papers, and periodic special reports
assessing specific impacts of climate change (the latest ones in the works:
oceans and ice cover, land degradation, and impacts of 1.5°C warming).

## Understanding climate science

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2014/08/gw-

science-brenda-communicating-climate-science-2012-newscorp-

event.jpg?itok=ju1rOzFj)

Photo: Desdemona Burgin

Scientists use specific terms to describe how well something is known, which
can lead to confusion among non-scientists about important scientific findings
on global warming. Knowing this terminology is key to understanding what is
known about climate change.

**Learn more:**

                    
                                                * Certainty vs. Uncertainty: Understanding Scientific Terms About Climate Change
                    

## We Need Your Support

to Make Change Happen

We _can_ reduce global warming emissions and ensure communities have the
resources they need to withstand the effects of climate change—but not without
you. Your generous support helps develop science-based solutions for a
healthy, safe, and sustainable future.

                    
                                                * $25
                            * $50
                            * $100
                            * $250
                            * $1000
                            * Other
                    

Donate

                    
                                                * $25
                            * $50
                            * $100
                            * $250
                            * $1000
                            * Other
                    

Donate

## Share

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    

## Related Content

                    
                                                * Global Warming Solutions: Reduce Emissions
                    
                            * Global Warming Impacts
                    

## From our blogs

                    
                                                * Bury Myers’ NOAA Nomination Dr. Jane Willenbring, Associate Professor at the Institution of Oceanography; Dr. Amy Freitag is a contract social scientistJune 6, 2019
                            * Wheeler’s Breathtaking Ignorance of Science, in One Comment Gretchen GoldmanJune 6, 2019
                            * Will the Trump USDA Deliver on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans? Our New Report Shows What’s at Stake Sarah ReinhardtJune 6, 2019
                    

More

## On Twitter

Tweets by @UCSUSA

## Infographic

## WHEN RISING SEAS HIT HOME

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2017/08/gw-

impacts-story-map-screenshot-play-arrow-thumbnail-308px.jpg)

**INTERACTIVE MAP:** Explore the hundreds of US coastal communities that will
face chronic inundation and possible retreat as sea levels rise.

## CLIMATE SCIENCE VS. FOSSIL FUEL FICTION

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2015/03/gw-infographic-

sidebar-thumbnail-climate-science-vs-fossil-fuel-fitction.jpg)

Fossil fuel companies and their lobbying groups have been deceiving the public
for decades about the facts of global warming.

## SEA LEVEL RISE AND GLOBAL WARMING

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2016/11/gw-impacts-sea-

level-rise-infographic-sidebar-graphic-308px.jpg)

Sea level is rising—at an accelerating rate—especially along the U.S. East
Coast and Gulf of Mexico.

## WESTERN WILDFIRES AND CLIMATE CHANGE

![Western Wildfires and Climate

Change](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2014/07/Infographic-

western-wildfires-and-climate-change.jpg?itok=1BlISsgQ)

Rising temperatures are increasing wildfire risk throughout the Western U.S.

## THE CLIMATE ACCOUNTABILITY SCORECARD

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2016/10/gw-sidebar-

graphic-climate-accountability-scorecard-burning.jpg)

See how major fossil fuel companies rank on climate deception, disclosure, and
action.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/02/stand-up-for-

science-sidebar-image.jpg)

We are closely monitoring the Trump administration—and fighting back whenever
science is attacked, undermined, or disregarded.

## Take Action

                    
                                                * ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_default/public/images/2019/01/gw-air-pollution.jpg?itok=qWFf0EMB)
                    

We have reached a tipping point on climate action—Scientists say we have
roughly one decade left to avoid the most severe consequences of climate
change. Urge your legislators to act on climate.

We need swift, equitable, significant, and effective climate action. >

We use cookies so that you will have the best possible experience on our
website. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies for site
features. Learn more in our privacy policy.

I Accept

![Untion of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-

ucs.png)

## Science for a healthy planet and safer world

                    
                                                * __
                            * __
                            * __
                            * __
                    
                            * About Us
                              * UCS Leadership & Experts
                              * Funding & Financials
                              * History & Accomplishments
                              * Jobs & Internships
                              * News
                            * Issues
                              * Clean Energy
                              * Clean Vehicles
                              * Food & Agriculture
                              * Global Warming
                              * Nuclear Power
                              * Nuclear Weapons
                            * Our Podcast
                              * Got Science?
                            * Publications
                            * Reports & Analysis
                            * Center for Science and Democracy
                            * Action Center
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * State Disclosures
                            * Our Blogs
                              * The Equation
                              * All Things Nuclear
                            * Site Map
                            * Contact Us
                            * UCS Store
                    
                            * Ways to Give
                              * Donate
                              * Give Monthly
                              * Planned Gifts
                            * How to Help
                              * Become a Member
                              * Take Action
                              * Subscribe
                    
                            * A **Normal Font Size**
                            * A **Larger Font Size**
                            * A **Largest Font Size**
                    

**Union of Concerned Scientists**  
2 Brattle Square, Cambridge MA 02138-3780

(C) Union of Concerned Scientists  
UCS is a 501c(3) organization

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

