

Skip to main content clock menu more-arrow no yes

                    
                                                *             *             *             * Log In or Sign Up
                            * Log In
                            * Sign Up
                    
                            * Recode 
                            * Explainers 
                            * The Highlight 
                            * Future Perfect 
                            * The Goods 
                            * Politics & Policy 
                            * Culture 
                            * Science & Health 
                            * World 
                            * Identities 
                            * Energy & Environment 
                            * Technology 
                            * Business & Finance 
                            * First Person 
                            * Video 
                            * Podcasts 
                            * More
                    
                            * Recode 
                            * Explainers 
                            * The Highlight 
                            * Future Perfect 
                            * The Goods 
                            * Politics & Policy 
                            * Culture 
                            * Science & Health 
                            * World 
                            * Identities 
                            * Energy & Environment 
                            * Technology 
                            * Business & Finance 
                            * First Person 
                            * Video 
                            * Podcasts
                    

✕

# Why India’s air pollution is so horrendous

Eleven out of the 12 most polluted cities on a World Health Organization list
were in India.

By Umair Irfan Updated Oct 31, 2018, 6:39pm EDT

Share Tweet Share

**Share** Why India’s air pollution is so horrendous

tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email

![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/thumbor/CTUa_1-F_-F658J0POYXxHIJduY=/0x0:3500x2336/1200x800/filters:focal\(1234x201:1794x761\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/59663021/India_Smog_pollution_Delhi.0.jpg)
New Delhi, India, under heavy smog on November 14, 2017. Dominique
Faget/AFP/Getty Images

India is once again heading into the worst time of year for air pollution, a
season where the country’s notoriously poor quality becomes even more toxic.

Soot, dust, ozone, and sulfur oxides are a growing threat for billions of
people around the world. The ****World Health Organization reported this week
that 93 percent of all children in the world breathe air with pollution levels
that exceed their guidelines.

A whopping nine in 10 people on Earth breathe highly polluted air, and more
than 80 percent of urban dwellers have to endure outdoor pollution that
exceeds health standards, according to the WHO’s World Global Ambient Air
Quality Database.

But even among countries gasping for breath, India stands out for air that is
consistently, epically terrible.

> In recent years, the first two weeks of November have brought the worst air
pollution of the year to #Delhi, #India.

>

> With daily averages already in the "very unhealthy" range, 2018 seems set to
repeat the pattern. #AirQuality pic.twitter.com/Irals60HFS

>

> — Robert Rohde (@RARohde) October 31, 2018

Drawing on measurements and calculations as of 2016 from air monitoring
stations in 4,300 cities, the WHO reported in March that India’s cities suffer
the most.

When you look at the database’s ranking of particulate pollution in cities, 11
of the 12 cities with the highest levels are located in India. Kanpur, India,
population 3 million, tops the list with a yearly average of **** 319
micrograms per cubic meter of PM2.5, the most hazardous particle commonly
measured. (Bamenda, Cameroon, is the one city outside of India in the top 12.)

### Cities with the highest small particulate measurements in the world

Country | City | PM2.5 (µg/m³)  
---|---|---  
Country | City | PM2.5 (µg/m³)  
India | Kanpur | 173  
India | Faridabad | 172  
India | Varanasi | 151  
India | Gaya | 149  
India | Patna | 144  
India | Delhi | 143  
India | Lucknow | 138  
Cameroon | Bamenda | 132  
India | Agra | 131  
India | Muzaffarpur | 120  
India | Srinagar | 113  
India | Gurgaon | 113  
World Health Organization

Many different air pollutants can impact health — nitrogen oxide, carbon
monoxide, and ozone, among them. But the database classifies air pollution in
two ways: by PM2.5, particles smaller than 2.5 microns in diameter, and by PM
10, particles that are 10 microns in diameter. The smaller PM2.5 particles
from sources like open flames and diesel exhaust can linger in the air longer
and penetrate deeper into the lungs than larger particles, which is why
they’re the bigger concern for health officials and a high-priority target for
reduction.

Technically, the WHO doesn’t treat its data as a ranking but rather a
measurement of where risks are. But it’s clear from the report that India is
one of the riskiest countries in the world to breathe, up there with
Bangladesh and Georgia. When it comes to comparing PM10 measurements of the
world’s largest cities, India’s capital Delhi comes in with an annual average
of 292, ahead of Cairo (284), Dhaka (147), Mumbai (104), and Beijing (92), the
Washington Post noted.

Frequent unhealthy levels of pollution from sources ranging from vehicles to
the burning of coal and wood for cooking, dust storms, or forest fires affect
most of the country. India’s hills and mountains also act as basins that trap
toxic air over vast swaths of the country, sometimes making the air too
dangerous to breathe. Just check out this map of air pollution from October:

![A map of particulate air pollution in India on October 31,

2018.](https://cdn.vox-cdn.com/thumbor/i5pUZ3-9lkt-

pSZola9cn2frap4=/0x0:386x628/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:386x628\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/13366933/Screen_Shot_2018_10_31_at_5.06.37_PM.png)
A map of particulate air pollution in India on October 31, 2018. Berkeley
Earth

But how did it get so bad? Let’s take a closer look.

### Poverty and air pollution go hand in hand

Though you can find unhealthy air in pretty much any country, the worst
pollution these days is accumulating in developing countries with growing
populations. The highest-ranking city from an OECD country in the PM2.5 list
is Hobart, Australia, coming in at 206.

“Air pollution threatens us all, but the poorest and most marginalized people
bear the brunt of the burden,” said Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO’s
director general, in a statement.

Cookstoves, heating fuel, and kerosene lighting are all common sources of
pollution in big cities in developing countries. Poor governance is also a
major factor in pollution since lax enforcement of standards for car exhausts,
crop burning, or dust from construction sites leads to more particulates in
the air.

Some countries like China are making progress. Cities in China have moved down
in the rankings, and the government is seeking reforms to keep pollution in
check as dirty air has become an increasingly volatile public concern.

Governing air pollution has proved to be much trickier in India.

![Indian school children wearing pollution masks hold placards as they

participate in a march to raise awareness of air pollution levels in New Delhi

on November 15, 2017.](https://cdn.vox-cdn.com/thumbor/SjF7HpaxeyTC39vK-

zsBeKnnVK8=/0x0:3600x2278/1200x0/filters:focal\(0x0:3600x2278\):no_upscale\(\)/cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/10781861/India_Air_pollution_children.jpg)
Indian schoolchildren wearing pollution masks hold placards as they
participate in a march to raise awareness of air pollution levels in New Delhi
on November 15, 2017. Prakash Singh/AFP/Getty Images

### Why India’s air is so bad

Delhi, India’s capital region, home to nearly 19 million people, is notorious
for choking air that is now turning the iconic white marble walls of the Taj
Mahal green.

The city faced a major air quality crisis late last year as the literally off-
the-charts pollution forced flight cancellations, caused traffic accidents,
closed schools, and sparked protests. One minister described Delhi as a “gas
chamber,” and the city declared a public health emergency.

Dozens of other Indian cities are dealing with severe pollution too, but many
of the particulates that blanket the metro regions originate in rural areas,
and rural areas are just as badly affected by poor air, if not more so. ****
In 2015, about 75 percent of deaths linked to air pollution in India, some 1.1
million people, occurred in rural areas.

Two-thirds of India’s population still lives outside of cities, and 80 percent
of these households rely on biomass like wood and dung for cooking and
heating. Agricultural practices like burning crop stubble also remain
widespread.

This smoke can then waft over major cities such as Chennai and Mumbai, where
it commingles with traffic exhaust, factory emissions, and construction dust.
It can also get trapped by inland by features like hills and mountains,
leaving few areas in the country where Indians can breathe easy.

“This region is land-locked — pollution cannot dissipate quickly — and does
not have the advantage of the coast like Mumbai or Chennai,” Anumita Roy
Chowdhury, head of the air pollution and clean transportation program at the
Delhi-based advocacy organization Center for Science and Environment, told the
Indian Express. “Also, a lot of the smaller cities have poor waste management,
there is a lot of burning, solid fuel use, they are moving from non-motorised
to motorised transport. Chulhas [cookstoves], we know, contribute to 25
percent outdoor pollution in India.”

These stoves also cause pollution indoors, which is especially dangerous for
children, according to the WHO. The latest report found that mothers in India
were more likely to deliver underweight babies in households that used wood or
dung as cooking fuel. Children were more likely to develop asthma and acquire
infections like tuberculosis.

The other major cause of India’s pollution problem is politics. Kirk Smith, a
professor of global environmental health at the University of California
Berkeley, observed that there are anti-pollution laws in India but they aren’t
enforced well, so while major cities can ban pollution sources like brick
kilns from within their boundaries, they can’t stop exhaust from blowing over
from the perimeter.

Controlling this kind of pollution requires coordinating across city and
provincial boundaries over a geographic basin, but rural politicians and urban
politicos in India have vastly different constituencies, making it difficult
for urbanites to convince farmers to use less polluting practices or for rural
people to ask city dwellers to drive less.

“Outdoor air pollution is pretty much a governance problem,” said Smith.

He also noted that the WHO’s list of most polluted cities should be viewed
with caution. Pollution can vary drastically over small areas, and many of the
cities on the list are reporting data from just one air quality monitor, which
may not be representative of the true picture of pollution in the city.

As for India’s sudden rise in the rankings, a big factor is that pollution in
many of these cities is being measured and reported for the first time,
meaning the problem may have always been there but hadn’t drawn the same level
of attention.

With more measurements and reporting, India’s pollution problems will likely
appear worse before they get better. But gathering this information is
nonetheless vital for the counteroffensive against poor air quality.

## Next Up In Explainers

                    
                                                * David French vs. Sohrab Ahmari and the battle dividing conservatives, explained
                            * The border is in crisis. Here’s how it got this bad.
                            * How many Americans live on $2 a day? The biggest debate in poverty research, explained.
                            * Lil Nas X isn’t an anomaly — black people have always been a part of country music
                            * Joe Biden’s evolution on abortion, explained
                            * 10 ways to accelerate progress against climate change
                    

### Most Read

                    
                                                1. Trump insulted Nancy Pelosi and Robert Mueller while at a cemetery for American WWII dead The president didn’t let the solemnity of the occasion stop him from talking trash about his political enemies.
                            2. Why conservatives are winning the internet A new book explains why digital activism helps conservatives more than liberals.
                            3. The rise of granny panties High-waisted underpants made a huge comeback. Here’s why it happened.
                            4. You probably haven’t heard of Nubank. But it could be a $10 billion company, so you should. SoftBank and others are trying to place a bet on the most valuable startup in Latin America.
                            5. Trump’s UK trip illustrates why people worried about a Trump presidency Bad tweets, ill-advised statements, ignorance — it’s all on display.
                    

vox-mark

### Vox Sentences

The news, but shorter, delivered straight to your inbox.

Subscribe

By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the
data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page.

This Article has a component height of 48. The sidebar size is long.

## The Latest

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63963806/931529066.jpg.0.jpg)

## Even worse than Jeffrey Goldberg’s sexist quote was his gaslighting of a

journalist

By Laura McGann

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63963488/GettyImages_1147878786.0.jpg)

## “Pig Ebola” is spreading uncontrollably in China and Vietnam

By Vox Staff

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63963102/542782576.jpg.0.jpg)

## 50 years after Stonewall, the NYPD finally apologizes to the LGBTQ

community

By Vox Staff

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63962843/GettyImages_1148312422.0.jpg)

## Trump insulted Nancy Pelosi and Robert Mueller while at a cemetery for

American WWII dead

By Vox Staff

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63958346/62160588_10158363772901754_2086284985416810496_n.0.png)

## YouTube may allow hate speech if it’s part of a larger argument. Yikes.

By Aja Romano

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAUEBAAAACwAAAAAAQABAAACAkQBADs)
![](https://cdn.vox-

cdn.com/uploads/chorus_image/image/63957889/1128427948.jpg.0.jpg)

## You probably haven’t heard of Nubank. But it could be a $10 billion

company, so you should.

By Theodore Schleifer

Chorus

                    
                                                * Terms of Use
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Cookie Policy
                            * GDPR Commitment
                            * Communications Preferences
                            * Contact
                            * Send Us a Tip
                            * Masthead
                            * About Us
                            * Editorial Ethics and Guidelines
                    

All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details.

Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media (C) 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All
Rights Reserved

tweet share

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

