

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1389601884702365&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

Fast
Company![Menu](https://images.fastcompany.net/image/upload/v1540915228/fcweb/3_Line_Burger_ffffff2x_tiojxh.svg)

                    
                                                *  __ __ __ __ __
                            *  __
                    
                            * Co.Design
                            * Tech
                            * Work Life
                            * Creativity
                            * Impact
                            * Audio
                            * Video
                            * News
                            * Recommender
                            * Subscribe
                    
                            * ### Homepage
                    
                            * ### Co.Design
                    
                            * ### Tech
                    
                            * ### Work Life
                    
                            * ### Creativity
                    
                            * ### Impact
                    
                            * ### Audio
                    
                            * ### Video
                    
                            * ### News
                    
                            * ### Recommender
                    
                            * ### Subscribe
                    

Help Center

collections

                    
                                                * ### Recommender
                    

The apps, books, movies, music, TV shows, and art are inspiring our some of
the most creative people in business this month

                    
                                                * ### Strong Female Lead
                    

The struggles and triumphs of prominent women in leadership positions

                    
                                                * ### Productivity
                    

Productivity tips and hacks

                    
                                                * ### Platform Wars
                    

The major tech ecosystems that battle for our attention and dollars

                    
                                                * ### Tech Forecast
                    

What’s next for hardware, software, and services

                    
                                                * ### Most Innovative Companies
                    

Our annual guide to the businesses that matter the most

                    
                                                * ### Most Creative People
                    

Leaders who are shaping the future of business in creative ways

                    
                                                * ### World Changing Ideas
                    

New workplaces, new food sources, new medicine--even an entirely new economic
system

                    
                                                * ### Innovation By Design
                    

Celebrating the best ideas in business

                    
                                                * ### FastCo.Works Studio
                    

An award-winning team of journalists, designers, and videographers who tell
brand stories through Fast Company's distinctive lens

Newsletter

Events

                    
                                                * ### Innovation Festival
                    

### The Grill

Current Issue

Current Issue

SUBSCRIBE

Follow us:

![Social media

icons](https://images.fastcompany.net/image/upload/v1541690325/fcweb/fb-icon-

circle-777777_hs2as9.svg)![Social media

icons](https://images.fastcompany.net/image/upload/v1541690328/fcweb/tw-icon-

circle-777777_fwaqmc.svg)![Social media

icons](https://images.fastcompany.net/image/upload/v1541690325/fcweb/insta-

icon-circle-777777_tciktn.svg)![Social media

icons](https://images.fastcompany.net/image/upload/v1541690329/fcweb/pocket-

icon-circle-777777_bw8vnx.svg)![Social media

icons](https://images.fastcompany.net/image/upload/v1541690328/fcweb/linkedin-

icon-circle-777777_dz2eja.svg)

advertisement

advertisement

advertisement

                    
                                                *  __
                            *  __
                            *  __
                            *  __
                    
                            * 11.13.14
                            * visualizing
                    

# The Genetically Modified Food You Eat Every Day

By Morgan Clendaniel 1 minute Read

Genetically modified food is in a store near you today. In fact, it's been
there for years. You may not know it, but in all the fracas over genetically
modified food, one point is often left out: You've been eating it for a long
time and no one has told you. This infographic from Nature's Path-which makes
organic cereals, bars, and waffles that contain no GMO ingredients, they'd
like you to know-shows where you're getting your genetically modified treats,
and why no one has told you:

Many crops are genetically modified so frequently, it's nearly impossible to
find non-GMO versions. These modifications usually involve either a seed
manufacturer making their seeds genetically resistant to a certain type of
weed-killer (that the seed company also conveniently sells-synergy!) or to
make plants resistant to certain pests naturally.

You may not know that you're eating these crops-despite the fact that they
appear in 80% of all packaged food sold in the country-because the U.S. is one
of the few places in the developed world that doesn't require food producers
to disclose whether or not their ingredients have any modifications.

If something is labeled "organic" by the USDA, that means it has no GMO crops.
The Non-GMO Project is also working on a system for labeling products that
aren't genetically enhanced. To be fair, there isn't any science that proves
that GMO crops are at all bad for consumption; there also aren't any that
confirm that they're safe. For now, we're in the dark. And more and more GMO
products-like Monsanto's sneaky, unlabeled sweet corn, the first direct-to-
consumer GMO food-are coming to market every day. The full infographic is
here:

advertisement

advertisement

advertisement

**Ideas Newsletter**

Sign Up

Receive special Fast Company offers.

See All Newsletters

## Video

### Impact

### Creativity

### Co.Design

### Work Life

                    
                                                * Advertise
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Terms
                            * Contact
                            * About Us
                            * Site Map
                            * Fast Company & Inc © 2019 Mansueto Ventures, LLC
                            * ![Digital Advertising Alliance \(DAA\) Self-Regulatory Program](data:image/png;base64,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)
                    

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6916907&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-805310h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

![](//grunerandjahr.112.2o7.net/b/ss/gjincfastcoprod/1/H.24.4--NS/0/5658306)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

