

skip to main content

![KCUR logo](//www.kcur.org/sites/kcur/files/201904/kcur_logo_1.png)

Site Menu Donate

                    
                                                * Menu
                    
                            * Programs
                              * Program Guide
                              * Podcasts
                              * Statehouse Blend Kansas
                              * My Fellow Kansans
                              * Midwesternish
                              * Statehouse Blend Missouri
                              * Central Standard
                              * Up To Date
                              * Fish Fry
                              * Night Tides
                              * 12th Street Jump
                              * Cyprus Avenue
                              * Question Quest
                              * All Programs
                              * RSS Feeds
                            * News
                              * Harvest Public Media
                              * Kansas News Service
                              * Education
                              * Health
                              * Sports
                              * Elections
                              * Government
                              * Economy
                              * Science & Environment
                              * NPR News
                            * Special Projects 
                              * Here To Listen
                              * StoryCorps One Small Step
                              * StoryCorps In Kansas City
                              * Sharing America
                              * Guns And America
                            * Arts & Culture
                              * Artland
                              * Books
                              * Film
                              * Food And Drink
                              * Music
                              * Performance 
                              * Visual Arts
                            * Ways to Give
                              * Donate Now
                              * Sustaining Members
                              * Volunteer
                              * Donate Your Vehicle
                              * Partner Marketing
                              * Planned Giving
                              * Membership FAQs
                              * Leadership Circle
                              * Update Your Monthly Donation
                            * Ways to Connect
                              * Events
                              * RadioActive 2019
                              * Facebook
                              * Twitter
                              * Instagram
                              * KCUR Generation Listen
                              * Contact Us
                            * Info
                              * Inside KCUR
                              * Contact Us
                              * Program Guide
                              * Staff
                              * Governance
                              * Newsletters
                              * Partner Marketing
                              * Jobs
                              * Internships
                            * Search
                    
                            * Menu
                    
                            * Programs
                              * Program Guide
                              * Podcasts
                              * Statehouse Blend Kansas
                              * My Fellow Kansans
                              * Midwesternish
                              * Statehouse Blend Missouri
                              * Central Standard
                              * Up To Date
                              * Fish Fry
                              * Night Tides
                              * 12th Street Jump
                              * Cyprus Avenue
                              * Question Quest
                              * All Programs
                              * RSS Feeds
                            * News
                              * Harvest Public Media
                              * Kansas News Service
                              * Education
                              * Health
                              * Sports
                              * Elections
                              * Government
                              * Economy
                              * Science & Environment
                              * NPR News
                            * Special Projects 
                              * Here To Listen
                              * StoryCorps One Small Step
                              * StoryCorps In Kansas City
                              * Sharing America
                              * Guns And America
                            * Arts & Culture
                              * Artland
                              * Books
                              * Film
                              * Food And Drink
                              * Music
                              * Performance 
                              * Visual Arts
                            * Ways to Give
                              * Donate Now
                              * Sustaining Members
                              * Volunteer
                              * Donate Your Vehicle
                              * Partner Marketing
                              * Planned Giving
                              * Membership FAQs
                              * Leadership Circle
                              * Update Your Monthly Donation
                            * Ways to Connect
                              * Events
                              * RadioActive 2019
                              * Facebook
                              * Twitter
                              * Instagram
                              * KCUR Generation Listen
                              * Contact Us
                            * Info
                              * Inside KCUR
                              * Contact Us
                              * Program Guide
                              * Staff
                              * Governance
                              * Newsletters
                              * Partner Marketing
                              * Jobs
                              * Internships
                            * Search
                    

# Climate Change Will Affect Infrastructure, Agriculture And Health Of

Kansans

By Brian Grimmett _•_ Nov 27, 2018

ShareTweetEmail

                    
                                                * ![Water covers a road in Kansas City, Mo., after a storm led to flooding in July 2017. A new climate report suggests more intense storms in the future will lead to severe flooding.](/sites/shared/npr/styles/placed_wide/nprshared/201905/723039582.jpg)
                    

Water covers a road in Kansas City, Mo., after a storm led to flooding in July
2017. A new climate report suggests more intense storms in the future will
lead to severe flooding.

Brian Grimmett

Originally published on May 13, 2019 5:15 pm

Kansans can expect rising temperatures and more extreme flooding in the
future, according to the latest National Climate Assessment.

Kansas has always experienced severe weather events. But as average
temperatures rise, due in part to heat-trapping pollution released from fossil
fuels, these severe weather events are predicted to become more extreme.

That means periods of drought will be more severe, while storms will be more
intense and lead to greater flooding.

This cycle of long periods of drought followed by intense rainstorms will also
create a greater risk of wildfire on Kansas rangeland.

So even though wildfire is a natural and regular occurence, the conditions in
the future will mean it’s more likely these fires will burn faster and hotter
and cover more territory.

While past droughts have been driven by climate variability, or natural
changes that fall within observed ranges, climate change is likely to make the
problem worse.

The report also predicts that by the end of the century, average temperatures
in Kansas will rise as much as 4 degrees and the number of days above 100
degrees will increase by 20 to
30.![](https://www.kmuw.org/sites/kmuw/files/styles/placed_wide/public/201811/figure23_4.png)

The impact of those changes will create winners and losers, both in ecosystems
and among cities and states.

“Some plants will do great, some crops will do great in a warmer environment,”
said Kevin Kloesel, lead author of the report's chapter on Kansas, Oklahoma
and Texas. “And then some won’t.

"So the question is, who will be the folks that will transition economically
to those things that will do better first?”

The report predicts that if people do not adapt to or mitigate the risks
associated with climate change, agricultural production will decrease,
commodity prices will rise and human health, especially among the elderly,
will suffer.

While Kansans are already adapting to some of the changes brought on by
climate change, Kloesen said it’s mostly reactionary.

“It’s very hard to be proactive, sort of looking into the crystal ball,
because there’s always that seed of doubt,” he said. “ 'OK, is that really
going to happen? And did I do that needlessly?' ”

To have a greater impact, the report suggests individuals and communities need
to make decisions based on possible future scenarios and do what they can now
to limit greenhouse gas emissions.

Brian Grimmett, based at KMUW in Wichita, is a reporter for the Kansas News
Service, a statewide collaboration between KMUW, Kansas Public Radio, KCUR and
High Plains Public Radio covering health, education and politics. Follow him
on Twitter @briangrimmett.

_Coverage of energy and the environment is made possible in part by ITC Great
Plains and the Corporation for Public Broadcasting._

_Kansas News Service stories and photos may be republished at no cost with
proper attribution and a linkksnewsservice.org._

Copyright 2019 KMUW | NPR for Wichita. To see more, visit KMUW | NPR for
Wichita.![](https://www.google-

analytics.com/__utm.gif?utmac=UA-5828686-4&utmdt=Climate+Change+Will+Affect+Infrastructure%2C+Agriculture+And+Health+Of+Kansans&utme=8\(APIKey\)9\(MDA4OTAxNzAzMDEzMjc0MTc2MzA5ZDZlMw004\))

Tags:

Kansas News Service

environment

Climate Change

agriculture

ShareTweetEmail

### Related Content

## State Temporarily Halts Massive Expansion Of Cattle Feedlot Near Powell

Gardens

By Andrea Tudhope _•_ Oct 23, 2018

![](https://www.kcur.org/sites/kcur/files/styles/medium/public/201810/040318_AT_lonejack.JPG)

Andrea Tudhope / KCUR 89.3

_Updated October 24, 2018 —_ A state commission on Tuesday temporarily halted
the massive expansion of a cattle slaughterhouse and feedlot near Kansas
City's Powell Gardens by recommending revoking its permit.

The Missouri Administrative Hearing Commission (AHC) weighed in after a long
battle between the botanical gardens and the Valley Oaks Steak Company.

## 2018 Revealed Just How Ill-Prepared We Are For Climate Change

By Terry Gross _•_ Aug 15, 2018

Copyright 2018 Fresh Air. To see more, visit Fresh Air.![](https://www.google-

analytics.com/__utm.gif?utmac=UA-5828686-4&utmdt=2018+Revealed+Just+How+Ill-

Prepared+We+Are+For+Climate+Change&utme=8\(APIKey\)9\(MDAxODc1ODA5MDEyMjg1MDYxNTFiZTgwZg004\))

TERRY GROSS, HOST:

## 5 Major Crops In The Crosshairs Of Climate Change

By Daniel Charles _•_ Oct 25, 2018

![](https://mediad.publicbroadcasting.net/p/shared/npr/styles/medium/nprshared/201811/658609601.jpg)

__

Climate change is coming like a freight train, or a rising tide. And our food,
so dependent on rain and suitable temperatures, sits right in its path.

The plants that nourish us won't disappear entirely. But they may have to move
to higher and cooler latitudes, or farther up a mountainside. Some places may
find it harder to grow anything at all, because there's not enough water.

Here are five foods, and food-growing places, that will see the impact.

**Wheat**

                    
                                                * ![NPR](//www.kcur.org/sites/kcur/files/styles/partner_footer_logo/public/201503/npr-logoWHITE.png)
                            * ![Harvest Public Media](//www.kcur.org/sites/kcur/files/styles/partner_footer_logo/public/201503/HPM_logo_no_slogan_bw_white_image.png)
                            * ![University of Missouri-Kansas City](//www.kcur.org/sites/kcur/files/styles/partner_footer_logo/public/201503/UMKC_1C_white.png)
                            * ![Kansas News Service](//www.kcur.org/sites/kcur/files/styles/partner_footer_logo/public/201704/KNS_logo_web_outlines_white.png)
                    
                            * (C) 2019 KCUR
                            * Listen Live
                            * Donate Now
                    

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

