

Skip to content

                    
                                                * English
                            * 한국어
                    

![IMBOLDN - The Lifestyle Guide for Men on the Cutting

Edge](https://imboldn.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/imboldn-logo-black-1.png)

IMBOLDN

The Lifestyle Guide for Men on the Cutting Edge

                    
                                                * Login
                    

![IMBOLDN](https://imboldn.com/wp-content/themes/imboldn-

cb/images/logo/imboldn-logo-white.png)

                    
                                                * Everyday Carry
                              * Bags
                              * Tools
                              * Watches
                              * EDC-Misc.
                            * Tech
                              * Audio
                              * Photo & Video
                              * Gear
                              * Misc.
                            * Style
                              * Apparel
                              * Footwear
                              * Grooming
                              * Style-Misc.
                            * Rides
                              * Cars
                              * Motorcycles
                              * Bicycles
                              * Misc.
                            * Art & Design
                              * Architecture & Interiors
                              * Books
                              * Culture
                              * Misc.
                            * Lifestyle
                              * Bar & Kitchen
                              * Outdoor
                              * Health & Fitness
                              * Misc.
                            * Digest
                            * Video
                    
                            * English
                            * 한국어
                    
                            * Everyday Carry
                              * Bags
                              * Tools
                              * Watches
                              * EDC-Misc.
                            * Tech
                              * Audio
                              * Photo & Video
                              * Gear
                              * Misc.
                            * Style
                              * Apparel
                              * Footwear
                              * Grooming
                              * Style-Misc.
                            * Rides
                              * Cars
                              * Motorcycles
                              * Bicycles
                              * Misc.
                            * Art & Design
                              * Architecture & Interiors
                              * Books
                              * Culture
                              * Misc.
                            * Lifestyle
                              * Bar & Kitchen
                              * Outdoor
                              * Health & Fitness
                              * Misc.
                            * Digest
                            * Video
                            * About
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Terms of Use
                            * Contact
                            * Login
                            *             *             *             *             *             * (C) IMBOLDN ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
                    

Search for:

# The Horsepower Wars are Over. Or Are they?

From classic cars to modern marvels, we take a look at the most powerful and
groundbreaking automobiles around.

April 17, 2018 by The IMBOLDN Editors

# The Horsepower Wars are Over. Or Are they?

From classic cars to modern marvels, we take a look at the most powerful and
groundbreaking automobiles around.

April 17, 2018 by The IMBOLDN Editors

                    
                                                *             *             *             *             * __Favorite
                    

Challenger, GTO, Roadrunner, all classic car names from the 1960's and '70's.
Packing monster V8's, these were built for getting from one red light to the
next as fast as possible. But times change, Detroit's horsepower obsession
died and sanity returned.

Not for long though. Power sells, and like adversaries peering out from behind
the barricades, manufacturers can't resist taking shots at one another.
Neither is this competition a purely American phenomenon. The Germans seem
unable to resist a good scrap. Heck, even the French and the Brits join in
from time to time.

## Horsepower wars: the early years

In the '50's and '60's cars were cheap and young men had money in their
pockets. Racing inevitably followed. Quick to spot a market, Detroit built
ever faster cars while sales-hungry marketing teams boasted of their power.

> Detroit built ever faster cars while sales-hungry marketing teams boasted of
their power.

Chevrolet claimed 450 hp for their LS6-equipped Chevelle SS. The 1970 Pontiac
Firebird was rated at 330 hp, and the fabled 426 cu. in. Chrysler Hemi motor
put out 425 hp. Of course, some caveats are in order. First, these numbers
were gross outputs, not the power actually achieved at the rear wheels. That
could be up to 30% lower. And second, these cars weren't what you might call
well-rounded. They were built for running the quarter-mile.

Take a Saturday evening stroll down almost any Main Street in the late '60's
and you'd see them: two cars lined up at a red light, snarling and shaking as
they waited for it to change. Horsepower ruled. Then three things happened.
Insurance rates went up, the switch to unleaded gasoline lowered compression
ratios, which meant less power, and the oil crisis came along. The horsepower
war seemed over, though it turned out more of a ceasefire.

![](https://imboldn.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Horsepower-

wars-12-1024x768.jpg)Lamborghini Countach LP 500S

## Meanwhile, over in Europe

While companies like Jaguar and Ferrari were building beautiful, and for the
era, powerful, cars, horsepower wasn't a focus of competition through the
'60's. In the late '70's and into the '80's though that began to change .
Lamborghini unleashed the Countach, Rolls-Royce turbocharged the engine in
their Bentley Mulsanne and Ferrari gave us the Testarossa.

These cars were far out reach for the average “petrolhead”, but what they
could afford were German sedans. With no speed limits on their autobahns, the
Germans were expert at engineering very, very fast cars. And so began the next
round.

![](https://imboldn.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/horse-

powerwars-13-1024x576.jpg)

## The German battle

Audi, BMW and Mercedes pride themselves on building sporting sedans. Some
drivers though were willing to sacrifice creature comforts in exchange for
more performance. And so BMW's 'M' brand was born. And AMG Mercedes, and in
more recent years, the 'S' and 'RS' lines from Audi.

Few would disagree the benchmark for sporting sedans is BMW's M3. This first
emerged in 1985 as the E30 coupe and convertible. A 2.3 liter four cylinder
made 192 hp. A few years later a specialist engineering company known as AMG
unveiled modified versions of the Mercedes-Benz 190 and 300.

> Audi, BMW and Mercedes pride themselves on building sporting sedans. Some
drivers though were willing to sacrifice creature comforts in exchange for
more performance.

The AMG 190E came with an in-line six that made 231 hp while the AMG 300E got
a 5.0 liter V8 good for 340 hp.

The M3 got faster. The E36 model made 282 hp, followed later by the 420 hp E92
. Meanwhile, Mercedes bought AMG and gave us every faster versions of their
luxo sedans and wagons. (For a real 'sleeper' search out their E63 wagon,
available with over 600 hp.)

Determined not to be bystanders, Audi built cars like the Quattro. This lead
to vehicles like the 444 hp RS6, launched in 2002 with a twin-turbo 4.2 liter
V8 shoehorned-in under the hood.

## Enough already!

Keen drivers know there's a limit to how much power you can use, safely, on
public roads. And as Porsche's Andreas Preuninger, told the UK's 'Car'
magazine in 2015, more power adds weight in terms of bigger brakes and
stronger suspensions. In fact he said then, “For my personal tastes, around
500bhp is enough.” Perhaps that's why the 2018 Porsche 911 Targa 4 GTS makes
'only' 450 hp.

## Is the war over?

No. Engine outputs keep rising. Back in 2010 Car & Driver counted nearly 40
cars on the market with outputs over 400 hp. For a while 500 hp seemed the
performance benchmark. And then it was 600 hp.

Proving Audi are still in the game, the RS7 Performance is rated at 605 hp and
the R8 V10 Plus at 610 hp. From the UK the Aston Martin DB11 has exactly 600
hp and the Bentley Continental GT Speed 633 hp. GM fired a triple salvo with
the 640 hp Cadillac CTS-V, 650 hp Camaro ZL1 and 650 hp Corvette Z06, and then
there's the now discontinued 645 hp Viper from Dodge.

                    
                                                * ![](https://imboldn.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/horsepower-wars-01-1024x768.jpg)
                            * ![](https://imboldn.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/horsepower-wars-02-1024x768.jpg)
                            * ![](https://imboldn.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/horsepower-wars-03-1024x768.jpg)
                    

But these aren't the top dogs. Outputs are still going up. Bentley offers a
700 hp Continental Supersports, and Chrysler brings three 700+ hp monsters to
the fight. (That's the Challenger SRT Demon, the SRT Hellcat, and the Jeep
Trackhawk.)

So who is king? For now it's the Bugatti Chiron at 1,500 hp, although tiny
Swedish manufacturer Koenigsegg seems determined to get one up on the French-
built though of German parentage, hypercar.

## Will it end?

It's worth noting that these horsepower gains have come without increases in
engine size. In fact engines in many modern supercars are smaller than they
used to be. This is because new technology, particularly turbocharging, has
enabled increased output per liter.

> Engines in many modern supercars are smaller than they used to be. This is
because new technology, particularly turbocharging, has enabled increased
output per liter.

Turbocharging has an Achilles heel though: lag – the time needed to spin up
the turbine to pump more air into the engine. But engineers have a solution
there, two in fact. In the interests of fuel efficiency, electric
turbochargers are replacing exhaust-driven units, and those can start spinning
as soon as the gas pedal goes down. And then there's hybrid technology.
Electric motors deliver an instantaneous surge of torque, as anyone who's
witnessed a Tesla drag race can attest.

So are the horsepower wars over? Not a chance.

Home » Digests » The Horsepower Wars are Over. Or Are they?

### Related Articles

#### 10 Best Sunglasses for Summer

Shield your eyes in style with this season's best sunglasses.

#### IMBOLDN Week In Review

Put a twist on the familiar with this week's highlights: a hybrid Ferrari, a
quirky handheld console, a futuristic coffee grinder, and more.

#### Be King of the Cookout with This New Crop of BBQ and Wine Pairings

Eat and drink outside the box with these mouth watering wine and BBQ pairings.

#### 48 Hours in York, England

A little slice of medieval times dropped right into the 21st century.

#### IMBOLDN Week In Review

Welcome the new and revisit the old with this week's highlights, including a
new MacBook Pro, an aged Tennessee whiskey, a classic BMW motorcycle, and
more.

#### Like This, Try That: Rosé

We're shining a light on one of the most misunderstood varietals out there.

## Post navigation

IMBOLDN Week In Review

Like That? Try This: Cabernet Edition

                    
                                                * About
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Terms of Use
                            * Contact
                    
                            *             *             *             *             * ## Stay in the loop
                    

Get the best stories in your inbox daily.

By submitting, you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy & Cookies
Policy.

Imboldn™ All Rights Reserved

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet

