

Skip to main content

![U.S. flag](/themes/usda/img/favicons/flag-favicon-57.png)

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

![Dot gov](/themes/usda/img/icon-dot-gov.svg)

**The .gov means it’s official.**  
Federal government websites always use a .gov or .mil domain. Before sharing
sensitive information online, make sure you’re on a .gov or .mil site by
inspecting your browser’s address (or “location”) bar.

![SSL](/themes/usda/img/icon-https.svg)

This site is also protected by an SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) certificate
that’s been signed by the U.S. government. The **https://** means all
transmitted data is encrypted -- in other words, any information or browsing
history that you provide is transmitted securely.

Menu

![USDA Logo](/themes/usda/img/usda-symbol.svg) U.S. Department of Agriculture

![close](/themes/usda/img/close.svg)

## Main navigation

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Topics
                    
                              * Topics
                              * Animals
                              * Biotechnology
                              * Broadband
                              * Climate Solutions
                              * Conservation
                              * Data
                              * Disaster
                              * Farming
                              * Food and Nutrition
                              * Forestry
                              * Health and Safety
                              * Opioids
                              * Organic
                              * Plants
                              * Recreation
                              * Research and Science
                              * Rural
                              * Trade
                    
                            * Our Agency
                    
                              * Our Agency
                              * About USDA
                              * Agencies
                              * Initiatives
                              * Careers
                              * Employee Services
                              * Reorganizing USDA
                              * Staff Offices
                    
                            * Media
                    
                              * Media
                              * Agency News Releases
                              * Agency Reports
                              * Blog
                              * Digital
                              * Press Releases
                              * Radio
                    

Search usda.gov Search

## Utility navigation

                    
                                                * Glossary
                            * Ask the Expert
                            * Contact Us
                    

## Breadcrumb

                    
                                                1. Home
                            2. Media
                            3. Blog
                            4. Building the Evidence on Corn Ethanol’s Greenhouse Gas Profile
                    

## Blog Categories

                    
                                                * Animals (40)
                    
                            * Biotechnology (3)
                    
                            * Climate (9)
                    
                            * Conservation (54)
                    
                            * Disaster (7)
                    
                            * Energy (5)
                    
                            * Farming (38)
                    
                            * Food and Nutrition (89)
                    
                            * Forestry (97)
                    
                            * Health and Safety (53)
                    
                            * Initiatives (33)
                    
                            * Recreation (4)
                    
                            * Research and Science (126)
                    
                            * Rural (9)
                    
                            * Technology (21)
                    
                            * Trade (18)
                    

## Show Blogs for

                    
                                                * June 2019
                            * May 2019
                            * April 2019
                            * March 2019
                            * February 2019
                            * December 2018
                            * November 2018
                            * October 2018
                            * September 2018
                            * August 2018
                            * July 2018
                            * June 2018
                            * May 2018
                            * April 2018
                            * March 2018
                            * February 2018
                            * January 2018
                            * December 2017
                            * November 2017
                            * October 2017
                            * September 2017
                            * August 2017
                            * July 2017
                            * June 2017
                            * May 2017
                            * April 2017
                            * March 2017
                            * February 2017
                    

## Archive

Blog Archives

# Building the Evidence on Corn Ethanol’s Greenhouse Gas Profile

Posted by Jan Lewandrowski, USDA Office of the Chief Economist in Energy

Apr 02, 2019

![A collage of corn, scientists and a man holding a jar of

ethanol](https://farm8.staticflickr.com/7852/46800514464_68670e86b6_z.jpg) A
new study looks at the greenhouse gas benefits of corn ethanol. Images
courtesy of USDA.

Over the past two decades, the demand for renewable fuels — including corn-
based ethanol — has helped drive a strong domestic market for corn, and
supported rural America by generating jobs (PDF, 1.5 MB). New research is
confirming that corn ethanol also has more greenhouse gas benefits than
previously thought.

A study we just published in the journal _Biofuels_ found that the greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions from corn ethanol are about 39 percent lower than gasoline
on energy equivalent basis. The study, titled “ _The greenhouse gas benefits
of corn ethanol—assessing recent evidence_ ,” also found that when ethanol is
produced at natural gas-powered refineries, the GHG emissions are even
lower—around 43 percent below gasoline. This study confirms work that we
released in 2018 (PDF, 3.2 MB) and adds to the mounting evidence of ethanol’s
GHG benefits, which have been often overlooked.

Unlike estimates of ethanol’s GHG profile from the early 2000’s, which relied
on projections of how growing corn for fuel would impact emissions, we now
have the benefit of looking back in time to see how the industry responded to
the requirements of the Renewable Fuels Standard (RFS). As it turns out, the
data show that the last decade was a time of great innovation and productivity
improvement in both corn production and ethanol refinery technologies. The
story of how farmers and ethanol producers responded to the requirements of
the RFS is one worth understanding—and this story is now being told in the
peer-reviewed literature.

## Projections of Increased GHG Emissions due to Land-Use Change Didn’t

Materialize

Earlier estimates of ethanol’s GHG emissions assumed the increased price of
corn (caused by increased demand for corn ethanol) would result in farmers
bringing new land into production (otherwise known as land-use change).
Projections warned of an increase in GHG emissions from tilling native
grassland, and converting wetlands and forests for corn production. More
recent research shows that, while there has been some conversion and
reallocation of land, things did not end up playing out the way these earlier
projections anticipated.

A 2015 study published in the _Annual Review of Resource Economics_ showed
that although higher corn prices gave an incentive to farmers to grow more
corn, farmers responded with increases in double-cropping and planting in
fields that were fallow, and reducing temporary pasture to increase corn
production—and far less land use change than originally predicted. In other
words, although farmers produced more corn, they relied on improved technology
and intensive cropping on existing fields rather than converting new lands
into production.

Another study published last year in the _American Journal of Agricultural
Economics_ found that between 2003 and 2014, increases in ethanol demand alone
led to a 3 percent increase in corn acreage, and less than one percent
increase in total crop acreage in the United States by 2012 compared to 2008.
This was a far smaller impact than previously projected.

These studies demonstrate that although there _were_ additional acres brought
into corn production as a result of ethanol demand, the land use change
impacts weren’t nearly as drastic as we once thought.

## Better Refining Technology and Land Management Have Also Improved Ethanol’s

GHG Balance

But it isn’t just land use change that influences the GHG balance of ethanol.
How corn is produced on farms and how refineries operate can also have a large
impact on greenhouse gases, from the changes in soil carbon and the emissions
associated with growing crops, to the GHG emissions from producing the fuel.

Independent of our study, another recent analysis titled, “ _Land management
change greatly impacts biofuels’ greenhouse gas emissions_ ,” and published in
the journal _Global Change Biology Bioenergy_ in 2018 found that when corn
farmers adopt practices that increase soil organic carbon, such as using
manure and cover crops, the lifecycle GHG emissions for ethanol are about 40
percent lower than gasoline.

Our article in the journal _Biofuels_ also assessed the GHG impacts of
improved technologies. These include adopting conservation (PDF, 7.6 MB) on
corn farms, such as cover crops, no-till, and precision agriculture
technology, which can decrease emissions on the farm level. Combined with
efficiency improvements in refineries, such as switching to biomass as a
process fuel, these improvements could result in a 70 percent lower GHG
emission profile for ethanol over gasoline by 2022.

Refinery efficiency improvements can have benefits beyond reducing GHG
emissions as well, such as producing co-products like corn oil. Since 2010,
ethanol refineries have evolved by adopting more efficient processes to
produce more ethanol per bushel of corn. Of course, taking these changes into
account further drives down ethanol’s lifecycle GHG emissions.

All this research aside, there are certainly environmental tradeoffs involved
in ethanol production. Any form of energy production has social and
environmental costs. However, when it comes to GHGs, the evidence demonstrates
that corn ethanol is a net positive compared with gasoline—and there is room
for continued improvement.

There’s one more point worth mentioning here: incentivizing ethanol through
the Renewable Fuels Standard has offset 10 percent of our reliance on fossil
fuels in the transportation sector. No matter how you look at it, that’s
progress towards a cleaner energy future.

Category/Topic: Energy

Tags: Office of the Chief Economist ethanol Renewable Fuel Standard greenhouse
gas emissions

## You May Also Like

                    
                                                * Abundant Supplies are Forecast for the Coming Crop Year in the U.S. and Around the World
                    
                            * USDA’s 2019 Agricultural Forum: Recap and Takeaways
                    
                            * USDA Report is First to Provide Consolidated Data on Conservation Practices by U.S. Farmers
                    

## Write a Response

Your name

Your response

CAPTCHA This question is for testing whether or not you are a human visitor
and to prevent automated spam submissions.

## Comments

Marc J. Rauch

Apr 05, 2019

This is a very welcome authoritative study that 'once again' states that the
production and use of corn ethanol is a cleaner, safer, and economically
viable alternative to the poison fuels that come from petroleum oil.

I say 'once again,' because this isn't the first study to reach this
conclusion - there have been a few others over the years (listed below).
Unfortunately, in their never ending greedy mission to force more of their
poison down our throats, the oil industry keeps trying new ways to present
their same old lies against ethanol and therefore keeps having their shills
pretend like they've found new evidence against ethanol.

It would be great if the oil industry stopped the nonsense on their own, but
they probably won't so we should expect more deaths, illnesses, and wars
caused by their actions.

On the bright side, America's farming and ethanol communities have heroically
risen to a great challenge and defeated all the naysayers. They will continue
to innovate, increase crop yields and ethanol output, and add in other crops
and materials to further expand ethanol output as consumer demand increases
(and as higher ethanol-gasoline blends are made available at the pump).

PREVIOUS STUDIES:  
Biofuels & Greenhouse Gas Emissions: Myths versus Facts  
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/edg/media/BiofuelsMythVFact.pdf

Innovation is Driving Down Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Corn-based Ethanol  
https://www.usda.gov/media/blog/2017/01/12/innovation-driving-down-gree…

Argonne Lowers Land Use Change GHG Emissions For Corn Ethanol  
http://ethanolproducer.com/articles/11524/argonne-lowers-land-use-chang…

Review and Evaluation of Studies on the Use of E15 in Light-Duty Vehicles  
https://www.ourenergypolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/b378858ac325…

Land-use change and greenhouse gas emissions from corn and cellulosic ethanol  
https://www.anl.gov/article/landuse-change-and-greenhouse-gas-emissions…

Fuel Ethanol Produced from Midwest U.S. Corn: Help or Hindrance to the Vision
of Kyoto?  
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10473289.1999.10463846

andrew mcneil

Apr 24, 2019

If ethanol was really economically viable you wouldn't need to pass laws to
make people buy it. Oil companies, being greedy, would replace gas with
ethanol and pocket the difference.

Return to top

## Main navigation - Footer

                    
                                                * Home
                            * Topics
                            * Our Agency
                            * Media
                    

## Footer navigation

                    
                                                * Site Map
                            * Policies and Links
                            * Our Performance
                            * Careers
                            * Report Fraud on USDA Contracts
                            * Visit OIG
                            * Plain Writing
                            * Open
                            * Digital Strategy
                            * FOIA
                            * Accessibility Statement
                            * Privacy Policy
                            * Non-Discrimination Statement
                            * Anti-Harassment Policy
                            * Information Quality
                            * USA.gov
                            * WhiteHouse.gov
                            * eGov
                            * Feedback
                            * No FEAR Act Data
                    

### Sign Up for Updates

Subscribe

![USDA Logo](/themes/usda/img/usda-symbol.svg) U.S. Department of Agriculture

USDA on Twitter USDA on Facebook USDA Constant Contact

USDA on Instagram USDA on Flickr USDA on Youtube USDA RSS

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

