

![Knoxville News Sentinel](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/sites/knoxnews/images/site-masthead-logo-dark@2x.png)

SUBSCRIBE NOWfor full access

                    
                                                * ![Knoxville News Sentinel](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/sites/knoxnews/images/site-nav-logo-dark@2x.png)
                            * Home
                            * News
                            * Sports
                            * Knox.biz
                            * Go Knoxville
                            * Shopper News
                            * corrections
                            * Opinion
                            * Urban Knoxville
                            * Obituaries
                            * USA Today
                            * Media
                            * Homes
                            * Apartments
                            * Jobs
                            * Cars
                            * Classifieds
                            * Explore Tennessee
                            * PUBLIC NOTICES
                            * Advertise with Us
                            * Business Directory
                            * More
                    
                              * Home
                              * News
                              * Sports
                              * Knox.biz
                              * Go Knoxville
                              * Shopper News
                              * corrections
                              * Opinion
                              * Urban Knoxville
                              * Obituaries
                              * USA Today
                              * Media
                              * Homes
                              * Apartments
                              * Jobs
                              * Cars
                              * Classifieds
                              * Explore Tennessee
                              * PUBLIC NOTICES
                              * Advertise with Us
                              * Business Directory
                    
                            * Search
                    
                            *             * Subscribe
                            * salutation
                    
                              * Manage Account
                              * Access e-Edition
                              * Newsletters
                              * Pay Bill
                              * Report Delivery Issues
                              * Pause Delivery
                              * Subscriber Guide
                              * Help Center
                              * Sign Out
                    

Have an existing account?

Sign In

Already have a subscription?

Activate Your Account

Don't have an account?

Create One

Get the news

###### Share This Story!

Let friends in your social network know what you are reading about

FacebookEmailTwitterGoogle+LinkedInPinterest

#### 5 critters you might not expect in Tennessee (but are here anyway)

That alligator captured in Monroe County Tuesday night was only the latest
example of a non-indigenous critter finding its way into Tennessee.

![Loading…](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/knoxnews/uscp-web-

static-4510.17.0/images/indicators/facebook-loading.gif)Post to Facebook

5 critters you might not expect in Tennessee (but are here anyway) That
alligator captured in Monroe County Tuesday night was only the latest example
of a non-indigenous critter finding its way into Tennessee. Check out this
story on knoxnews.com: https://knoxne.ws/2DeEDbf

CancelSend

#### Sent!

A link has been sent to your friend's email address.

#### Posted!

A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.

###### Join the Conversation

To find out more about Facebook commenting please read the Conversation
Guidelines and FAQs

## Comments

This conversation is moderated according to USA TODAY's community rules.
Please read the rules before joining the discussion.

# 5 critters you might not expect in Tennessee (but are here anyway)

Chuck Campbell, Knoxville News Sentinel Published 2:12 p.m. ET Sept. 19, 2018
| Updated 4:18 p.m. ET Sept. 19, 2018

CLOSE![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/uxstatic/knoxnews/uscp-web-

static-4510.17.0/images/sprites/icon_close.png)

Humans are not the only ones who have had to deal with Florence Time

![636729575079368194-Alligator1.JPG](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/4246f27f8c2935ff740abd0dce9a8e0dce8bd49c/c=0-0-3020-4027/local/-/media/2018/09/19/TennGroup/Knoxville/636729575079368194-Alligator1.JPG?width=534&height=712&fit=crop)

TWRA Officer Joe Pike with a 4-foot alligator captured in Monroe County on
Tuesday night, Sept. 18, 2018.(Photo: Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency)

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

There are no piranhas in Tennessee's lakes or monkeys in Tennessee's forests -
yet, but you never know what the future might bring.

Here are five animals that, improbably enough, have found their way into
Tennessee in recent years.

## Alligators

Roadside alligator attractions used to be a novelty adventure reserved for
vacations to Florida, but now the reptiles are finding their way here.

“Alligators expanding into Tennessee is just another species that we must
learn to coexist with like many of the other Southern states,” says the
Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency.

Earlier this year, a seven-foot gator was discovered in the Wolf River WMA in
Fayette County, and on Tuesday night, a four-foot alligator was captured in
East Tennessee’s Monroe County.

**More:** TWRA confirms reptile captured in Monroe County is a gator

![The armadillo wandered into Florida, perhaps intending](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/229409e730ac32b7d0ddfbf289defd8b63486b6d/c=2-0-1498-1125/local/-/media/2018/08/02/Tallahassee/Tallahassee/636688215506727122-TLHBrd-09-04-2017-Democrat-1-A003-2017-09-03-IMG-

Armadillo-3-1-DUJG0KGB-L1092151774-IMG-

Armadillo-3-1-DUJG0KGB.jpg?width=540&height=405&fit=crop)

The armadillo wandered into Florida, perhaps intending only a temporary visit,
and instead ended up staying. Armadillos ae said to have no eyeshine. (Photo:
Kevin Robertson, FLORIDA TODAY FILE PHOTO)

## Armadillos

Armadillos, once associated primarily with Texas and Latin America, have
spread their range east across the South’s southernmost states and have more
recently migrated north into Tennessee, first in West Tennessee and now
spreading steadily eastward.

TWRA notes, “Unfortunately, armadillo are most commonly spotted along
roadsides after being hit by motor vehicles.”

![NASBrd_07-03-2013_AshlandCityTimes_1_B006~~2013~07~01~IMG_0703-CF-

FireAnts-0](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/e40ab2a84a62ee0126eb0aeb5163a3e46103bdc6/c=18-0-381-272/local/-/media/2016/06/15/Murfreesboro/B9322594381Z.1_20160615174507_000_GLKEN377S.1-0.jpg?width=540&height=405&fit=crop)

Fire ants can be controlled with the right plan and a little diligence and
determination. (Photo: Submitted)

## Fire ants

Nobody wants fire ants.

Once mostly confined to the subtropical areas of the South, these stinging
little reddish brown monsters have discovered with increasing frequency that
life can be good in Tennessee too.

Their mounds are most often spotted in sunny, open areas, and they can be up
to two feet tall.

If you see a suspected fire ant mound, watch your step. They don’t mess
around.

![Crystal River, Homosassa and the waters of Citrus County are considered the

manatee capital of the world.](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/38f1cfcecf6d125a42f34b4efd80387edd28537e/c=2-0-531-398/local/-/media/2018/07/11/TreasureCoast/TreasureCoast/636669052768381082-manatee.JPG?width=540&height=405&fit=crop)

Crystal River, Homosassa and the waters of Citrus County are considered the
manatee capital of the world. (Photo: ED MENSTER/PLANTATION ON CRYSTAL RIVER)

## Manatees

The lovable manatee is the opposite of the fire ant – they are trusting,
passive, nonterritorial … and no threat to humans.

They’re a long way from adapting to Tennessee winters – they’re even prone to
die in chilly water when Florida has an unconventionally cold snap – but one
famously determined manatee swam some 700 miles up the Mississippi River and
into Wolf Harbor, north of Memphis.

Unfortunately, the manatee was found dead in West Tennessee’s McKellar Lake
that December, less than two months after first being sited in Wolf Harbor. So
even if we do get more visitors in the future, don't expect manatees to take
up permanent residence in Tennessee anytime soon.

![A cougar stands on a rock in 2012 near Kalispell, Montana. After

disappearing from Tennessee almost a century ago, cougars have been

reappearing in the state in recent years.](https://www.gannett-

cdn.com/-mm-/cd4eaac20f6411c26ec979ea8babae1d29ace2c6/c=217-0-2784-1930/local/-/media/2018/05/19/USATODAY/USATODAY/636623477185671473-NP-

WILD-WEST-3.jpg?width=540&height=405&fit=crop)

A cougar stands on a rock in 2012 near Kalispell, Montana. After disappearing
from Tennessee almost a century ago, cougars have been reappearing in the
state in recent years. (Photo: © NGT)

## Cougars

Unlike the others on this list, cougars used to live in Tennessee but were
eventually crowded out of their habitats and hunted until they disappeared
from the state in the early 1900s.

But TWRA has confirmed sightings of cougars in Tennessee during the past
several years, especially in West and Middle Tennessee.

TWRA says that in the unlikely chance you encounter a cougar, “Never run, but
instead make yourself threatening by standing tall, waving your arms, throwing
objects, and yelling.”

CONNECTTWEETLINKEDINCOMMENTEMAILMORE

Read or Share this story: https://knoxne.ws/2DeEDbf

Share your feedback to help improve our site experience!

###### More Stories

                    
                                                * ![Cancun Mexican Grill and Cantina fires waitress after Snapchat video shows her spitting in drink](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/-mm-/a6e69ab46eed5c3c4610f76c8fdf6f2f905745fb/c=63-0-1409-1346/local/-/media/2016/12/14/NJGroup/Morristown/636173161033198998-ASBBrd-07-28-2015-PressMon-1-D005--2015-07-27-IMG---20031008.jpg-1-1-QVBDCVFM-L646347176-IMG---20031008.jpg-1-1-QVBDCVFM.jpg?width=80&height=80&fit=crop)
                    

###### Knox waitress fired for spitting in drink

June 4, 2019, 10:59 p.m.

                    
                                                * ![Zach Munday death investigation finished and findings sent to prosecutors, sheriff says](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/05/29/PKNS/fe36ac99-5132-4a0f-adff-74dab44309d1-61371424_2307366819508934_4325418077257728000_n.jpg?crop=361,363,x0,y0&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)
                    

###### Sheriff: Zach Munday death investigation is finished

June 4, 2019, 4:57 p.m.

                    
                                                * ![Congressman Burchett tweet about 'DIRTBAG' Serbians ticks off Kosovo group](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/-mm-/077c66e670605e7bd900b8891c7d17ecbaa2a8a5/c=820-0-4100-3280/local/-/media/2018/11/03/TennGroup/Knoxville/636768493668688206-election0802-574.JPG?width=80&height=80&fit=crop)
                    

###### Burchett tweet about 'DIRTBAG' Serbians angers Kosovo group

June 4, 2019, 2:29 p.m.

                    
                                                * ![Getting married? Tennessee law says ministers ordained online can't perform the ceremony](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/-mm-/e5ab90cd908a8b660396f272ead31441aa6df4ac/c=450-0-3150-2700/local/-/media/2016/10/17/TennGroup/Knoxville/636122983244917741-marriage-licenses.JPG?width=80&height=80&fit=crop)
                    

###### Getting married? Know this new Tennessee law

June 5, 2019, 8:14 a.m.

                    
                                                * ![Invasive Japanese knotweed worse than kudzu, threatens East Tennessee ecosystems](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/-mm-/1aa7429b9d3719f1b9ef8eac29083f335eed687e/c=89-0-1091-1002/local/-/media/2017/08/04/WIGroup/Milwaukee/636374663872390171-J-Knotweed-Elizabeth-Czarapata.jpg?width=80&height=80&fit=crop)
                    

###### Japanese knotweed: The invasive plant that's even worse than kudzu

June 4, 2019, 1:09 p.m.

                    
                                                * ![Smoky Mountains synchronous fireflies display left us nearly speechless](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/presto/2019/06/02/PKNS/8de2479c-91cd-4ffd-8e33-21c93a2c2e33-KNS_Elkmont_Fireflies_22A.JPG?crop=3731,3711,x444,y0&width=80&height=80&fit=bounds)
                    

###### Smoky Mountains synchronous fireflies display left us nearly

speechless

June 4, 2019, 9:51 a.m.

![](https://www.gannett-cdn.com/gannett-web/properties/knoxnews/logos-and-

branding/logo-default-light.svg)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

