

Toggle navigation

        
                        * EnglishEN![](/etc/designs/wbrrdesign/clientlibs-wbrredsign/img/angle-down-gray.svg)
                  * Español
                  * Français
                  * عربي
                  * Русский
                  * 中文
                  * View All »
        

News

![The World Bank Working for a World Free of

Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wb-header-en.svg)

Toggle navigation

        
                        *             * Who We Are
        

Leadership, organization, and history

        
                          * ![image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/images/megamenu-whoweare.jpg)
        

With 189 member countries, staff from more than 170 countries, and offices in
over 130 locations, the World Bank Group is a unique global partnership: five
institutions working for sustainable solutions that reduce poverty and build
shared prosperity in developing countries.

#### About the World Bank

        
                            * Overview
                    * Organization
                    * Partners
                    * History
                    * World Bank Group Strategy
                    * Archives
        

#### Accountability

        
                            * Annual Reports
                    * Access to Information
                    * Corporate Scorecard
                    * Integrity Vice Presidency
                    * Inspection Panel
                    * Grievance Redress Service
                    * Independent Evaluation Group
                    * Compliance Advisor Ombudsman
                    * Policies and Procedures
        

#### Experts And Leaders

        
                            * Office of the President
                    * Boards of Governors
                    * Boards of Directors
                    * Leadership
                    * Experts
        

* * *
        
                            * News _ Arrow_
        
                * What We Do
        

Projects, products, and services

        
                          * ![image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/images/megamenu-whatwedo.jpg)
        

The World Bank Group works in every major area of development. We provide a
wide array of financial products and technical assistance, and we help
countries share and apply innovative knowledge and solutions to the challenges
they face.

#### Development Projects

        
                            * Projects
                      * By Country
                      * By Sector
                      * By Theme
                    * Country Engagement
                      * Environmental and Social Policies for Projects
                      * Procurement for Projects and Programs
                    * Results
        

#### Priorities

        
                            * Human Capital Project
                    * Maximizing Finance for Development
        

#### Knowledge

        
                            * Research & Publications
                    * Data
                    * Learning
                    * Development Topics
                    * Open Knowledge Repository
        

#### Products & Services

        
                            * Financing Products & Advisory Services
                    * Treasury
        
                * Where We Work
        

Countries and regions

        
                          * #### Countries
        
                      * Afghanistan
                      * Albania - shqip
                      * Algeria - Français - عربي
                      * Angola - Português
                      * Antigua and Barbuda
                      * Argentina - Español
                      * Armenia
                      * Austria
                      * Azerbaijan
                      * Bahrain
                      * Bangladesh
                      * Belarus - Русский
                      * Belgium - Français
                      * Belize
                      * Benin - Français
                      * Bhutan
                      * Bolivia - Español
                      * Bosnia and Herzegovina
                      * Botswana
                      * Brazil - Português
                      * Bulgaria - Български
                      * Burkina Faso - Français
                      * Burundi - Français
                      * Cabo Verde - Português
                      * Cambodia - ភាសា​ខ្មែរ​
                      * Cameroon - Français
                      * Canada - Français
                      * Central African Republic - Français
                      * Chad - Français
                      * Chile - Español
                      * China - 中文
                      * Colombia - Español
                      * Comoros - Français
                      * Democratic Republic of Congo - Français
                      * Republic of Congo - Français
                      * Costa Rica - Español
                      * Cote d'Ivoire - Français
                      * Croatia
                      * Czech Republic
                      * Denmark
                      * Djibouti
                      * Dominica
                      * Dominican Republic - Español
                      * Ecuador - Español
                      * Egypt - العربية
                      * El Salvador - Español
                      * Equatorial Guinea
                      * Eritrea
                      * Estonia
                      * Ethiopia
                      * Europe (Western)
                      * Fiji
                      * Finland
                      * France - Français
                      * Gabon - Français
                      * The Gambia
                      * Georgia
                      * Germany
                      * Ghana
                      * Greece
                      * Grenada
                      * Guatemala - Español
                      * Guinea - Français
                      * Guinea-Bissau - Português
                      * Guyana
                      * Haiti - Français
                      * Honduras - Español
                      * Hungary
                      * Iceland
                      * India - Hindi
                      * Indonesia - Bahasa
                      * Iran
                      * Iraq - عربي
                      * Israel
                      * Italy
                      * Jamaica
                      * Japan - 日本語
                      * Jordan - عربي
                      * Kazakhstan - Русский
                      * Kenya
                      * Kiribati
                      * Korea
                      * Kosovo
                      * Kuwait
                      * Kyrgyz Republic - Русский
                      * Lao PDR
                      * Latvia
                      * Lebanon - عربي
                      * Lesotho
                      * Liberia
                      * Libya - عربي
                      * Lithuania
                      * Luxembourg - Français
                      * FYR of Macedonia - македонски
                      * Madagascar - Français
                      * Malawi
                      * Malaysia
                      * Maldives
                      * Mali - Français
                      * Marshall Islands
                      * Mauritania - Français
                      * Mauritius - Français
                      * Mexico - Español
                      * FS Micronesia
                      * Moldova - română
                      * Mongolia - Монгол
                      * Montenegro
                      * Morocco - عربي - Français
                      * Mozambique - Português
                      * Myanmar
                      * Namibia
                      * Nepal
                      * Netherlands
                      * Nicaragua - Español
                      * Niger - Français
                      * Nigeria
                      * Norway
                      * Oman
                      * Pakistan
                      * Palau
                      * Panama - Español
                      * Papua New Guinea
                      * Paraguay - Español
                      * Peru - Español
                      * Philippines
                      * Poland - Polski
                      * Portugal
                      * Qatar
                      * Romania - Română
                      * Russia - Русский
                      * Rwanda - Français
                      * Samoa
                      * Sao Tome and Principe - Português
                      * Senegal - Français
                      * Serbia
                      * Seychelles - Français
                      * Sierra Leone
                      * Singapore
                      * Slovak Republic
                      * Slovenia
                      * Solomon Islands
                      * Somalia
                      * South Africa
                      * South Sudan
                      * Spain - Español
                      * Sri Lanka
                      * St. Kitts and Nevis
                      * St. Lucia
                      * St. Vincent and Grenadines
                      * Sudan
                      * Suriname
                      * Swaziland
                      * Sweden
                      * Switzerland
                      * Syria - عربي
                      * Tajikistan - Русский
                      * Tanzania
                      * Thailand - ภาษาไทย
                      * Timor Leste (East Timor)
                      * Togo - Français
                      * Tonga
                      * Trinidad and Tobago
                      * Tunisia - عربي - Français
                      * Turkey - Türkçe
                      * Turkmenistan - Русский
                      * Tuvalu
                      * Uganda
                      * Ukraine - Yкраїнський
                      * United Arab Emirates
                      * United Kingdom
                      * United States of America
                      * Uruguay - Español
                      * Uzbekistan - Русский
                      * Vanuatu
                      * Venezuela - Español
                      * Vietnam - Tiẽng Việt
                      * West Bank and Gaza - عربي
                      * Yemen - عربي
                      * Zambia
                      * Zimbabwe
        

#### Recent Searches

#### Regions

        
                            * Africa
                    * East Asia and Pacific
                    * Europe and Central Asia
                    * Latin America and Caribbean
                    * Middle East and North Africa
                    * South Asia
        

#### Country Groups

        
                            * European Union
                    * Middle Income Countries
                    * Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
                    * Pacific Islands
                    * Small States
                    * Gulf Cooperation Council
                    * Western Europe
        
                * Understanding Poverty
        

Global data and statistics, research and publications, and topics in poverty
and development

        
                          * ![image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/images/megamenu-photo-pakistan.jpg)
        

We face big challenges to help the world’s poorest people and ensure that
everyone sees benefits from economic growth. Data and research help us
understand these challenges and set priorities, share knowledge of what works,
and measure progress.

#### Data & Research

        
                            * Open Data
                      * By Country
                      * By Indicator
                    * Research & Publications
        

#### Development Topics

        
                            * Climate Change
                    * Education
                    * Energy
                    * Fragility, Conflict and Violence
        
                      * Poverty
                      * Urban Development
                      * Trade
                      * Health
                    * All Development Topics _ Arrow_
        

* * *
        
                        * Work With Us
        

Jobs, procurement, training, and events

        
                          * #### For Job Seekers
        
                    * Jobs
                    * Programs & Internships
        

#### For Partners

        
                            * Partners
                    * Clients
                    * Private Sector
                    * Corporate Procurement 
                    * Civil Society
                    * Consultations
                    * Parliamentarians
        

#### For Investors

        
                            * World Bank Bonds & Investment Products
                    * Treasury
        

#### For Learners

        
                            * Open Learning Campus
        

#### Meet Us

        
                            * Events
                    * World Bank Live
                    * Speaker's Bureau
                    * Spring & Annual Meetings
        

* * *

* * *
        
                            * Contacts & Inquiries _ Arrow_
        
                * ![Search](/etc/designs/wbrrdesign/clientlibs-wbrredsign/img/search-orange.svg) X
                  * ## Search
        

![The World Bank Working for a World Free of

Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wb-header-en.svg) ![The World Bank Working

for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr/logo/logo-wb-header-en.svg)

Working for a World Free of Poverty

        
                        1. Who We Are
                2. News
        

PRESS RELEASE

# Warming Climate in India to Pose Significant Risk to Agriculture, Water

Resources, Health, says World Bank Report

June 19, 2013

* * *
        
                        * This page in:
                * English
                * हिंदी
        

* * *
        
                        * __Email
                * __Print
        
                * __Tweet
                * __Share
                * __Share
                *               * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/icons-linkin32x32.svg)
        

LinkedIn

        
                          * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sm-icons-digg.svg)
        

Digg

        
                          * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sm-icons-renren.svg)
        

人人网

        
                          * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/icons-stumbleupon.svg)
        

Stumble Upon

        
                          * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sm-icons-delicious.svg)
        

Delicious

        
                          * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr/stayconnected/sina-32x32.svg)
        

新浪微博

* * *

_Many of the worst climate impacts could still be avoided by holding warming
below 2°C_

**New Delhi, June 19, 2013 –** An expected 2°C rise in the world’s average
temperatures in the next decades will make India’s summer monsoon highly
unpredictable. Shifting rain patterns will leave some areas under water and
others without enough water for power generation, irrigation or, in some cases
even drinking says a scientific report commissioned by the World Bank Group.

_Turn Down The Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts and the Case for
Resilience,_ released today, looks at the likely impacts of 2°C and 4°C
warming on agricultural production, water resources, coastal ecosystems and
cities across South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and South East Asia. It builds
on a 2012 Bank report that concluded the world would warm by 4°C above pre-
industrial levels by the end of this century if countries did not take
concerted action now.

Depicting life in a not-too-distant future shaped by already present warming
trends, the new report warns that by the 2040s, India will see a significant
reduction in crop yields because of extreme heat. Reduced water availability
due to changes in precipitation levels and falling groundwater tables are
likely to aggravate the situation in India, where groundwater resources are
already at a critical level and about 15% of the country’s groundwater tables
are overexploited.

In India, more than 60% of the crop area is rain-fed, making it highly
vulnerable to climate-induced changes in precipitation patterns. It is
estimated that by the 2050s, with a temperature increase of 2°C-2.5°C compared
to pre-industrial levels, water for agricultural production in the river
basins of the Indus, Ganges and Brahmaputra will reduce further and may impact
food adequacy for some 63 million people.

The report, prepared for the World Bank by the Potsdam Institute for Climate
Impact Research and Climate Analytics and peer reviewed by 25 scientists
worldwide, says the consequences for South Asia of a warming climate are even
worse if global temperatures increased by an average of 4°C by 2090. In this
scenario, seen as likely unless action is taken now to limit carbon emissions,
South Asia would suffer more extreme droughts and floods, rising sea levels,
melting glaciers, and declines in food production. In India, for example, an
extreme wet monsoon that currently has a chance of occurring only once in 100
years is projected to occur every 10 years by the end of the century.

Many of the worst climate impacts could still be avoided by holding warming
below 2°C, but the window for action is narrowing rapidly. Urgent action is
needed to build resilience through climate-smart agriculture, flood defenses,
drought and heat resistant crops, improved ground water management, better
coastal infrastructure, and human health, the report says.

**Possible Impacts for India**

        
                        *  An extreme wet monsoon that currently has a chance of occurring only once in 100 years is projected to occur every 10 years by the end of the century.
                *  Kolkata and Mumbai are ‘potential impact hotspots’ threatened by extreme river floods, more intense tropical cyclones, rising sea levels and very high temperatures.
                *  Significant reduction in crop yields predicted. Some 63 million people may no longer be able to meet their caloric demand.
                *  Decreasing food availability can also lead to significant health problems.
                * Substantial reduction in the flow of the Indus and Brahmaputra in late spring and summer.
        

_“The future that scientists have envisioned in this report reinforces the
fact that climate change hits the poor the hardest and that it could roll back
decades of development gains in India. In order to minimize the impacts of a
changing climate, we need to ensure that our cities become_ _climate
resilient, that we develop climate-smart agriculture practices,_ _and find
innovative ways to improve both energy efficiency and the performance of
renewable energies,”_ said **Onno Ruhl,** World Bank country director in
India.

A warming climate will contribute to a slowing in the reduction in poverty.
While the lives of everyone in the region will be altered by climate change,
the impacts of progressive global warming will fall hardest on the poor who
are largely dependent on rain-fed agriculture or live in urban slums. Under
2°C warming by the 2040s, crop production in South Asia may reduce by at least
12%, requiring more than twice the imports to meet per capita demand than is
required without climate change. Decreasing food availability can also lead to
significant health problems, including childhood stunting, which is projected
to increase by 35% by 2050 compared to a scenario without climate change.

The report cited Kolkata and Mumbai along with Bangladesh as “potential impact
hotspots” threatened by “extreme river floods, more intense tropical cyclones,
rising sea levels and very high temperatures”. With South Asia close to the
equator, the sub-continent would see much higher rises in sea levels than
higher latitudes, with the Maldives confronting the biggest increases of
between 100-115 centimeters.

Melting glaciers and loss of snow also pose a significant risk to stable and
reliable water resources. Major rivers such as the Ganges, Indus and
Brahmaputra, depend significantly on snow and glacial melt water, which makes
them susceptible to climate-change induced glacier melt and reductions in
snowfall. The report projects a rapid increase in the frequency of low snow
years in the future, well before 2°C warming takes place. This could increase
the risk of flooding, threatening agriculture.

In collaboration with the government of India, the World Bank is taking steps
to build resilience against the impact of the present warming trends. World
Bank-supported projects in Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand are
helping local communities conserve their watershed better. This is expected to
improve the availability of water for farming and help farmers move to higher-
income yielding crops, promote the efficient use of scarce water resources and
help communities set up agri-businesses. World Bank-supported rural livelihood
projects, including the National Rural Livelihood Mission, are also
integrating water conservation and efficiency, soil conservation practices
etc. in their activities. The Bank is also supporting the development of
environmentally sustainable hydropower in India, as well as supporting the
National Solar and Energy Efficiency Missions through pilot projects.

IFC, the World Bank Group’s private sector arm, is working with several Indian
companies to build climate smart solutions. For example, it is introducing
efficient water use technologies for basmati rice cultivation in Haryana. Till
date, the project has led to water savings of 1.1 million cubic meters and has
benefited over 1,000 farmers. Another IFC program – Lighting Asia – is
providing renewable lighting solutions amongst two million people in rural
India. By the end of 2015, the program aims to bring down CO2 emissions by at
least 64,000 tons.

For a copy of **_Turn Down The Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts and
the Case for Resilience_** go to: http://climatechange.worldbank.org

Other Links:

World Bank in India

World Bank in South Asia

World Bank India on Facebook

World Bank India on Flickr

World Bank South Asia on Twitter

**__**

* * *

###### Media Contacts

India

Nandita Roy

Tel : 91-11-41479220

nroy@worldbank.org

Washington

Gabriela Aguilar

gaguilar2@worldbank.org

* * *

###### RESOURCES

        
                        * __**Report** : Turn Down the Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts and the Case for Resilience 
                * __**Infographic:** What Climate Change Means for Africa and Asia 
                * __**Feature:** What Climate Change Means for Africa, Asia and the Coastal Poor
        

* * *

###### RELATED

        
                        * Climate Change Website
                * Development in a Changing Climate Blog
                * New report finds India’s food security, water resources and health at risk from warming climate
        

* * *

###### PRESS RELEASE NO:

06/19/2013/SAR

* * *
        
                        * India 
                * South Asia 
                * Climate Change
        

Api

![](/etc/designs/wbr/clientlibs/img/loaderwb.svg)

Api

![](/etc/designs/wbr/clientlibs/img/loaderwb.svg)

* * *

###### Newsletters

View All newsletters »

        
                  * About
          * Data
          * Research and Publications
          * Learning
        
          * News
          * Projects and Operations
          * Countries
          * Topics
        

* * *

#### follow us

        
                  * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/fb.svg)
          * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/twitter.svg)
          * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/linkedln.svg)
          * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/instagram.svg)
          * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/youtube.svg)
          * ![Image](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/icons/flickr.svg)
        

#### newsletter

This Site in:

        
                  * English ![](/etc/designs/wbr/clientlibs-beta/img/angle-down.svg)
            * Español
            * Français
            * عربي
            * Русский
            * 中文
            * View All »
        
          * Legal Access to Information Jobs Contact
        

REPORT FRAUD OR CORRUPTION

        
                  * ![The World Bank Working for a World Free of Poverty](/content/dam/wbr-redesign/logos/logo-wbg-footer-en.svg)
          * IBRD IDA IFC MIGA ICSID
        

© The World Bank Group, All Rights Reserved.

You have clicked on a link to a page that is not part of the beta version of
the new worldbank.org. Before you leave, we’d love to get your feedback on
your experience while you were here. Will you take two minutes to complete a
brief survey that will help us to improve our website?

Cancel No Thanks Yes, I'll provide feedback

xClose

## Feedback Survey

Thank you for agreeing to provide feedback on the new version of
worldbank.org; your response will help us to improve our website.

What was the purpose of your visit to worldbank.org today?

Did the layout and navigation of the new site help you locate what you were
looking for?  
Yes No

Do you have any other feedback on the new version of our website? (Optional)

If you are willing to be contacted in the future to help us improve our
website, please leave your email address below.

Which of the following best describes your career field or organization?  
Student Academic/Professor Government Employee Media Organization Multilateral
Organization NGO or Nonprofit Private Sector Firm World Bank Group Other

How often do you visit the World Bank website?  
This is my first time Daily About once a week About once a month Every six
months or less often

SUBMIT

Thank you for participating in this survey! Your feedback is very helpful to
us as we work to improve the site functionality on worldbank.org.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

