

Skip to main content

SubscribeMenu

Scientific American

        
                  * Cart 0
          * Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?Login![Loading](/public/resources/loader-eba9d808f62929c2c4c744e562eca7d9.gif)Not yet registered?
          * |Stay Informed
        

SearchSubscribe

Close

SearchClose

Advanced Search

        
                  * The Sciences
          * Mind
          * Health
          * Tech
          * Sustainability
          * Education
          * Video
          * Podcasts
          * Blogs
          * Publications
          * Subscribe
          * Current Issue
          * Cart0
          * Sign In
          * Stay Informed
        
          * Share
          * Latest
        
          *       *       *       * ![Climatewire](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/F7BED560-0A61-41BB-816892BD8C54F2B4_source.png)
        

Environment

# CO2 Emissions Reached an All-Time High in 2018

The uptick follows several years of relatively flat emissions, underscoring
the urgency of climate action

        
                  * By Chelsea Harvey, E&E; News on December 6, 2018
        
          * Share on Facebook
        
          * Share on Twitter
        
          * Share on Reddit
        
          * Share on LinkedIn
        
          * Share via
        
          * Print
        

![CO2 Emissions Reached an All-Time High in

2018](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/629E2469-2443-4F1D-8B7DB7343B1412F9_source.jpg?w=590&h=800&ECFFE499-14C2-4440-95365D2B9BCFAA95)

Credit: NASA, GSFC and GMAO

Advertisement

Global carbon emissions reached an all-time high in 2018, an extraordinary
watermark in Earth's history that underscores the need for faster and stronger
action to address accelerating climate change, according to dozens of
scientists.

A report released yesterday by a consortium of researchers known as the Global
Carbon Project finds that global carbon dioxide emissions from burning fossil
fuels are likely to have increased by about 2.7 percent in 2018, after a 1.6
percent increase in 2017.

The rise comes after a three-year period in which emissions remained mostly
flat--providing hope to some climate activists that global carbon emissions
had reached their peak. The increases in 2017 and 2018 seem to suggest
otherwise.

The scientists project that fossil-fuel-related carbon dioxide emissions will
hit a record high of 37.1 billion metric tons by the end of this year. And
they estimate that total carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere will
also hit their highest level ever, at 407 parts per million--about 45 percent
higher than their preindustrial levels.

"[Current] energy and climate policies are not sufficient to overcome the
growth in economic activity or energy-use growth," said Glen Peters, research
director at the Center for International Climate Research in Norway and a co-
author of the new report. "So there's no other alternative but to ramp up
policies, basically, otherwise emissions will keep rising."

The projections come during a season of urgent international discussions about
the action required to meet the targets of the Paris climate agreement.

In October, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change released a special
report on the action that would be required to keep global temperatures within
a 1.5 degrees Celsius target. The report noted that global carbon emissions
would need to fall 50 percent by 2030 and reach net zero by 2050. The rate at
which nations would need to reduce their emissions each year in order to reach
those targets becomes steeper, and less attainable, every year that emissions
continue to rise.

Last month, the United Nations released a separate report on the "emissions
gap," or the mismatch between the Paris climate targets and the actions
nations are actually taking to reach them.

It confirms that the climate action pledged by nations is "inadequate to
bridge the emissions gap" and that if actions are not strengthened before
2030, the 1.5 C target will slip out of reach. Overall, it suggests that
current Paris commitments would need to be tripled to reach a 2 C target and
increased fivefold to reach the 1.5 C target.

This week and next, nations are meeting in Poland to negotiate a set of rules
for the Paris climate agreement, which will govern how individual countries'
pledges are reported and enforced. The news about emissions reaching historic
levels casts new urgency on the need to finalize the rulebook and begin
strengthening the Paris commitments.

## The global challenge

For the time being, the world appears to be settling into an average emissions
growth rate of about 1 percent per year, Peters noted, although it varies from
year to year. The past two years have seen slightly higher growth, and 2014
through 2016 saw less.

The report attributes the three-year pause largely to declines in coal use in
China, which was temporarily investing less into energy-intensive construction
projects, and the United States, thanks to a shift in natural gas, solar and
wind power. Now those days are over. Emissions are on the rise with coal use,
including a 4.5 percent increase in coal in China and a 7.1 percent increase
in India.

U.S. emissions are projected to grow by about 2.5 percent in 2018, despite an
otherwise downward trend--and continued declines for coal--in large part due
to growth in oil and natural gas and a year marked by unusually severe winter
and summer weather. That seems to have spiked emissions from heat and
electricity.

In a broader sense, reversing the upward trend in global emissions comes down
to two major challenges, Peters suggested--strengthening reductions in places
where emissions are already declining, and reducing growth in places where
emissions are still climbing. In nations where emissions are already trending
downward--the United States, for one--they must find ways to reduce their
emissions even faster. That can be done by displacing fossil fuels with clean
energy, electric vehicles and so on.

In nations where emissions are still rising, often in response to economic
growth and improved living standards, the challenges are often greater. Even
in countries with high rates of deployment for wind and solar, such as India
and China, growing demand for energy is still eclipsing growth in renewables.

Worldwide, renewable energy continues to see remarkable growth. The report
notes that renewables are on track to produce half the world's electricity by
2030. The problem is that the growth is not yet enough to keep track with
global energy demand and the timeline on which greenhouse gas reductions are
needed to meet the Paris goals.

Still, experts say there's room for optimism. In a comment published yesterday
in _Nature_ , dozens of co-authors--led by Christiana Figueres, a former
executive secretary of the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change--
suggested that decarbonizing the global economy by 2050 may still be within
reach.

The growth in renewables and other low-carbon technologies is encouraging,
they note, and some nations are already strengthening their Paris pledges.
What's needed now is continued policy growth that will "ensure that the
exponential curve of solutions outpaces that of climate impacts, and drives
net emissions to zero by 2050," they write.

Speed continues to be the critical factor, Peters noted.

"You could say every year of delay means we're facing higher temperatures in
the future or more negative emissions in the future, or both," he said.

_Reprinted from Climatewire with permission from E &E News. E&E provides daily
coverage of essential energy and environmental news at www.eenews.net._

### ABOUT THE AUTHOR(S)

#### Chelsea Harvey

#### Recent Articles

        
                  * Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S. Deaths
          * Mass Puffin Die-Off May Be Linked to Climate Change
          * "Tug-of-War" between Air Pollution and CO2 Masks Warming's Impacts
        

#### E&E; News

#### Recent Articles

        
                  * Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S. Deaths
          * What Long-Awaited Disaster Funding Does--and Does Not--Include
          * As Renewable Energy Subsidies Expire, Experts Advocate Tax Credits
        

## Latest News

![My Next

Chapter](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/E9904C4D-5310-46DA-A478C2678A202DF1_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Policy & Ethics

### My Next Chapter

8 hours ago — Mariette DiChristina

![High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural

Network](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6C243A30-A89D-458F-9FCC9C4A2C2A3537_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Computing

### High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural Network

9 hours ago — Christopher Intagliata

![Remembering Murray Gell-

Mann](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/23C98019-3DE6-4337-89F367C2E14D7C37_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Physics

### Remembering Murray Gell-Mann

9 hours ago — Stephen Wolfram

![Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S.

Deaths](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6823A5DF-023E-4E2A-95CF29B7EAB8F0EE_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Climate

### Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S. Deaths

9 hours ago — Chelsea Harvey and E&E News

![Rethinking National

Security](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/95DCFB0C-3E0B-46BC-

BACD9D67250A2DF4_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Policy & Ethics

### Rethinking National Security

11 hours ago — Martin E. Hellman

![Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or

Hype?](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/E84422C7-6D55-4610-B755A0DB315E0C52_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Wellness

### Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or Hype?

12 hours ago — Nutrition Diva Monica Reinagel

Advertisement

## Newsletter

## Get smart. Sign up for our email newsletter.

Sign Up

## Expertise. Insights. Illumination.

Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845,
including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.

Subscribe Now!![Expertise. Insights.

Illumination.](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/D5AF5187-56F7-4844-9937BFECE4B78D53_source.png?w=385&h=375)

Follow us

        
                  * instagram
          * soundcloud
          * youtube
          * twitter
          * facebook
          * rss
        

Scientific american arabic

العربية

        
                  * Store
          * About
          * Press Room
        
          * FAQs
          * Contact Us
          * Site Map
        
          * Advertise
          * SA Custom Media
          * Terms of Use
        
          * Privacy Policy
          * Use of Cookies
          * International Editions
        

Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial
relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found
at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy
of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.

(C) 2019 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc.

All Rights Reserved.

Scroll To Top

![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-403331h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

**You have free article s left.**

* * *

![Temp Paywall

Img](/public/resources/paywall_temp_img-098a5039687a6951d2abc22803855180.jpg)

Support our award-winning coverage of advances in science & technology.

See subscription options

Already a subscriber? Sign in.

You have no free articles left.

Subscribers get more award-winning coverage of advances in science &
technology.

Sign In

See Subscription Options

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

