

![This is a good article. Follow the link for more

information.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/94/Symbol_support_vote.svg/19px-

Symbol_support_vote.svg.png)

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

![Listen to this

article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/47/Sound-

icon.svg/20px-Sound-icon.svg.png)

# First Amendment to the United States Constitution

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Law guaranteeing freedom of speech, religion, assembly, press and petitions
and prohibiting establishment of an official religion

"First Amendment" redirects here. For the first amendments to other
constitutions, see First Amendment (disambiguation).

## This article is part of a series on the

Constitution of the  
United States of America  
![Greater coat of arms of the United

States.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/Greater_coat_of_arms_of_the_United_States.svg/160px-

Greater_coat_of_arms_of_the_United_States.svg.png)  
Preamble and Articles  
of the Constitution

  * Preamble

  * I

  * II
  * III
  * IV
  * V
  * VI
  * VII

Amendments to the Constitution

  * **Bill of Rights**

  * I

  * II
  * III
  * IV
  * V
  * VI
  * VII
  * VIII
  * IX
  * X

* * *

  * XI
  * XII
  * XIII
  * XIV
  * XV
  * XVI
  * XVII
  * XVIII
  * XIX
  * XX
  * XXI
  * XXII
  * XXIII
  * XXIV
  * XXV
  * XXVI
  * XXVII

Unratified Amendments

  * Congressional Apportionment
  * Titles of Nobility
  * Corwin
  * Child Labor
  * Equal Rights
  * D.C. Voting Rights

History

  * Drafting and ratification timeline

  * Convention

  * Signing

  * Federalism

  * Republicanism

Full text of the Constitution and Amendments

  * Preamble and Articles I–VII
  * Amendments I–X

  * Amendments XI–XXVII

  * Unratified Amendments

  * ![Flag of the United States.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/16px-Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) United States portal

  * U.S. Government portal
  * Law portal
  * Wikipedia book

  * v

  * t
  * e

The **First Amendment** ( **Amendment I** ) to the United States Constitution
prevents the government from making laws which respect an establishment of
religion, prohibit the free exercise of religion, or abridge the freedom of
speech, the freedom of the press, the right to peaceably assemble, or the
right to petition the government for redress of grievances. It was adopted on
December 15, 1791, as one of the ten amendments that constitute the Bill of
Rights.

The Bill of Rights was originally proposed to assuage Anti-Federalist
opposition to Constitutional ratification. Initially, the First Amendment
applied only to laws enacted by the Congress, and many of its provisions were
interpreted more narrowly than they are today. Beginning with _Gitlow v. New
York_ (1925), the Supreme Court applied the First Amendment to states—a
process known as incorporation—through the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment.

In _Everson v. Board of Education_ (1947), the Court drew on Thomas
Jefferson's correspondence to call for "a wall of separation between church
and State", though the precise boundary of this separation remains in dispute.
Speech rights were expanded significantly in a series of 20th and 21st-century
court decisions which protected various forms of political speech, anonymous
speech, campaign financing, pornography, and school speech; these rulings also
defined a series of exceptions to First Amendment protections. The Supreme
Court overturned English common law precedent to increase the burden of proof
for defamation and libel suits, most notably in _New York Times Co. v.
Sullivan_ (1964). Commercial speech, however, is less protected by the First
Amendment than political speech, and is therefore subject to greater
regulation.

The Free Press Clause protects publication of information and opinions, and
applies to a wide variety of media. In _Near v. Minnesota_ (1931) and _New
York Times v. United States_ (1971), the Supreme Court ruled that the First
Amendment protected against prior restraint—pre-publication censorship—in
almost all cases. The Petition Clause protects the right to petition all
branches and agencies of government for action. In addition to the right of
assembly guaranteed by this clause, the Court has also ruled that the
amendment implicitly protects freedom of association.

## Contents

  * 1 Text
  * 2 Background
  * 3 Establishment of religion
    * 3.1 Separationists
    * 3.2 Accommodationists
  * 4 Free exercise of religion
  * 5 Freedom of speech and of the press
    * 5.1 Wording of the clause
    * 5.2 Speech critical of the government
    * 5.2.1 World War I
    * 5.2.2 Extending protections
    * 5.3 Political speech
    * 5.3.1 Anonymous speech
    * 5.3.2 Campaign finance
    * 5.3.3 Flag desecration
    * 5.3.4 Falsifying military awards
    * 5.4 Compelled speech
    * 5.5 Commercial speech
    * 5.6 School speech
    * 5.7 Internet access
    * 5.8 Obscenity
    * 5.9 Memoirs of convicted criminals
    * 5.10 Defamation
    * 5.11 Private action
    * 5.12 Freedom of the press
  * 6 Petition and assembly
  * 7 Freedom of association
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 Further reading
  * 11 External links

## Text

> Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to
petition the Government for a redress of grievances.[1]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/df/Amendment_1.jpg/1999px-

Amendment_1.jpg)

The hand-written copy of the proposed Bill of Rights, 1789, cropped to just
show the text that would later be ratified as the First Amendment

## Background

Further information: Anti-Federalism

In 1776, the second year of the American Revolutionary War, the Virginia
colonial legislature passed a Declaration of Rights that included the sentence
"The freedom of the press is one of the greatest bulwarks of liberty, and can
never be restrained but by despotic Governments." Eight of the other twelve
states made similar pledges. However, these declarations were generally
considered "mere admonitions to state legislatures", rather than enforceable
provisions.[2]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1d/James_Madison.jpg/170px-

James_Madison.jpg)

James Madison, drafter of the Bill of Rights

After several years of comparatively weak government under the Articles of
Confederation, a Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia proposed a new
constitution on September 17, 1787, featuring among other changes a stronger
chief executive. George Mason, a Constitutional Convention delegate and the
drafter of Virginia's Declaration of Rights, proposed that the Constitution
include a bill of rights listing and guaranteeing civil liberties. Other
delegates—including future Bill of Rights drafter James Madison—disagreed,
arguing that existing state guarantees of civil liberties were sufficient and
that any attempt to enumerate individual rights risked the implication that
other, unnamed rights were unprotected. After a brief debate, Mason's proposal
was defeated by a unanimous vote of the state delegations.[3]

For the constitution to be ratified, however, nine of the thirteen states were
required to approve it in state conventions. Opposition to ratification
("Anti-Federalism") was partly based on the Constitution's lack of adequate
guarantees for civil liberties. Supporters of the Constitution in states where
popular sentiment was against ratification (including Virginia, Massachusetts,
and New York) successfully proposed that their state conventions both ratify
the Constitution and call for the addition of a bill of rights. The U.S.
Constitution was eventually ratified by all thirteen states. In the 1st United
States Congress, following the state legislatures' request, James Madison
proposed twenty constitutional amendments, and his proposed draft of the First
Amendment read as follows:

> The civil rights of none shall be abridged on account of religious belief or
worship, nor shall any national religion be established, nor shall the full
and equal rights of conscience be in any manner, or on any pretext, infringed.
The people shall not be deprived or abridged of their right to speak, to
write, or to publish their sentiments; and the freedom of the press, as one of
the great bulwarks of liberty, shall be inviolable. The people shall not be
restrained from peaceably assembling and consulting for their common good; nor
from applying to the Legislature by petitions, or remonstrances, for redress
of their grievances.[4]

This language was greatly condensed by Congress, and passed the House and
Senate with almost no recorded debate, complicating future discussion of the
Amendment's intent.[5][6] The First Amendment, along with the rest of the Bill
of Rights, was submitted to the states for ratification on September 25, 1789,
and adopted on December 15, 1791.[7][8]

## Establishment of religion

Main article: Establishment Clause

Thomas Jefferson wrote with respect to the First Amendment and its restriction
on the legislative branch of the federal government in an 1802 letter to the
Danbury Baptists (a religious minority concerned about the dominant position
of the Congregational church in Connecticut):

> Believing with you that religion is a matter which lies solely between Man &
his God, that he owes account to none other for his faith or his worship, that
the legitimate powers of government reach actions only, & not opinions, I
contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole American people
which declared that their legislature should "make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof", thus
building a wall of separation between Church & State. Adhering to this
expression of the supreme will of the nation in behalf of the rights of
conscience, I shall see with sincere satisfaction the progress of those
sentiments which tend to restore to man all his natural rights, convinced he
has no natural right in opposition to his social duties.[9]

In _Reynolds v. United States_ (1878) the Supreme Court used these words to
declare that "it may be accepted almost as an authoritative declaration of the
scope and effect of the amendment thus secured. Congress was deprived of all
legislative power over mere [religious] opinion, but was left free to reach
[only those religious] actions which were in violation of social duties or
subversive of good order." Quoting from Jefferson's Virginia Statute for
Religious Freedom the court stated further in _Reynolds_ :

> In the preamble of this act ... religious freedom is defined; and after a
recital 'that to suffer the civil magistrate to intrude his powers into the
field of opinion, and to restrain the profession or propagation of principles
on supposition of their ill tendency, is a dangerous fallacy which at once
destroys all religious liberty', it is declared 'that it is time enough for
the rightful purposes of civil government for its officers to interfere [only]
when [religious] principles break out into overt acts against peace and good
order.' In these two sentences is found the true distinction between what
properly belongs to the church and what to the State.

Originally, the First Amendment applied only to the federal government, and
some states continued official state religions after ratification.
Massachusetts, for example, was officially Congregational until the 1830s.[10]
In _Everson v. Board of Education_ (1947), the U.S. Supreme Court incorporated
the Establishment Clause (i.e., made it apply against the states):

> The "establishment of religion" clause of the First Amendment means at least
this: Neither a state nor the Federal Government can set up a church. Neither
can pass laws which aid one religion, aid all religions, or prefer one
religion to another ... in the words of Jefferson, the [First Amendment]
clause against establishment of religion by law was intended to erect 'a wall
of separation between church and State' ... That wall must be kept high and
impregnable. We could not approve the slightest breach.[11]

In _Torcaso v. Watkins_ (1961), the Supreme Court ruled that the Constitution
prohibits states and the federal government from requiring any kind of
religious test for public office. In the _Board of Education of Kiryas Joel
Village School District v. Grumet_ (1994),[12] The Court concluded that
"government should not prefer one religion to another, or religion to
irreligion."[13] In a series of cases in the first decade of the 2000s— _Van
Orden v. Perry_ (2005),[14] _McCreary County v. ACLU_ (2005),[15] and _Salazar
v. Buono_ (2010)[16] —the Court considered the issue of religious monuments on
federal lands without reaching a majority reasoning on the subject.

### Separationists

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1e/Thomas_Jefferson_by_Rembrandt_Peale%2C_1800.jpg/220px-

Thomas_Jefferson_by_Rembrandt_Peale%2C_1800.jpg)

U.S. President Thomas Jefferson wrote in his correspondence of "a wall of
separation between church and State".[17]

_Everson_ used the metaphor of a wall of separation between church and state,
derived from the correspondence of President Thomas Jefferson. It had been
long established in the decisions of the Supreme Court, beginning with
_Reynolds v. United States_ in 1879, when the Court reviewed the history of
the early Republic in deciding the extent of the liberties of Mormons. Chief
Justice Morrison Waite, who consulted the historian George Bancroft, also
discussed at some length the _Memorial and Remonstrance against Religious
Assessments_ by James Madison,[18] who drafted the First Amendment; Madison
used the metaphor of a "great barrier".[19]

In _Everson_ , the Court adopted Jefferson's words.[17] The Court has affirmed
it often, with majority, but not unanimous, support. Warren Nord, in _Does God
Make a Difference?_ , characterized the general tendency of the dissents as a
weaker reading of the First Amendment; the dissents tend to be "less concerned
about the dangers of establishment and less concerned to protect free exercise
rights, particularly of religious minorities."[20]

Beginning with _Everson_ , which permitted New Jersey school boards to pay for
transportation to parochial schools, the Court has used various tests to
determine when the wall of separation has been breached. _Everson_ laid down
the test that establishment existed when aid was given to religion, but that
the transportation was justifiable because the benefit to the children was
more important. In the school prayer cases of the early 1960s, ( _Engel v.
Vitale_ and _Abington School District v. Schempp_ ), aid seemed irrelevant;
the Court ruled on the basis that a legitimate action both served a secular
purpose and did not _primarily_ assist religion. In _Walz v. Tax Commission_
(1970), the Court ruled that a legitimate action could not entangle government
with religion; in _Lemon v. Kurtzman_ (1971), these points were combined into
the Lemon test, declaring that an action was an establishment if:[21]

  1. the statute (or practice) lacked a secular purpose;
  2. its principal or primary effect advanced or inhibited religion; or
  3. it fostered an excessive government entanglement with religion.

The _Lemon_ test has been criticized by justices and legal scholars, but it
remains the predominant means by which the Court enforces the Establishment
Clause.[22] In _Agostini v. Felton_ (1997), the entanglement prong of the
_Lemon_ test was demoted to simply being a factor in determining the effect of
the challenged statute or practice.[23] In _Zelman v. Simmons-Harris_ (2002),
the opinion of the Court considered secular purpose and the absence of primary
effect; a concurring opinion saw both cases as having treated entanglement as
part of the primary purpose test.[22] Further tests, such as the endorsement
test and coercion test, have been developed to determine whether a government
action violated the Establishment Clause.[24][25]

In _Lemon_ the Court stated that the separation of church and state could
never be absolute: "Our prior holdings do not call for total separation
between church and state; total separation is not possible in an absolute
sense. Some relationship between government and religious organizations is
inevitable", the court wrote. "Judicial caveats against entanglement must
recognize that the line of separation, far from being a 'wall', is a blurred,
indistinct, and variable barrier depending on all the circumstances of a
particular relationship."[26]

### Accommodationists

Accommodationists, in contrast, argue along with Justice William O. Douglas
that "[w]e are a religious people whose institutions presuppose a Supreme
Being".[27] This group holds that the _Lemon_ test should be applied
selectively.[27] As such, for many conservatives, the Establishment Clause
solely prevents the establishment of a state church, not public
acknowledgements of God nor "developing policies that encourage general
religious beliefs that do not favor a particular sect and are consistent with
the secular government's goals."[28][29]

## Free exercise of religion

Main article: Free Exercise Clause

"Freedom of religion means freedom to hold an opinion or belief, but not to
take action in violation of social duties or subversive to good order."[30] In
_Reynolds v. United States_ (1878), the Supreme Court found that while laws
cannot interfere with religious belief and opinions, laws can regulate some
religious practices (e.g., human sacrifices, and the now obsolete Hindu
practice of suttee). The Court stated that to rule otherwise, "would be to
make the professed doctrines of religious belief superior to the law of the
land, and in effect permit every citizen to become a law unto himself.
Government would exist only in name under such circumstances."[31] In
_Cantwell v. Connecticut_ (1940), the Court held that the Due Process Clause
of the Fourteenth Amendment applied the Free Exercise Clause to the states.
While the right to have religious beliefs is absolute, the freedom to act on
such beliefs is not absolute.[32]

In _Sherbert v. Verner_ (1963),[33] the Supreme Court required states to meet
the "strict scrutiny" standard when refusing to accommodate religiously
motivated conduct. This meant that a government needed to have a "compelling
interest" regarding such a refusal. The case involved Adele Sherbert, who was
denied unemployment benefits by South Carolina because she refused to work on
Saturdays, something forbidden by her Seventh-day Adventist faith.[34] In
_Wisconsin v. Yoder_ (1972), the Court ruled that a law that "unduly burdens
the practice of religion" without a compelling interest, even though it might
be "neutral on its face", would be unconstitutional.[35][36]

The need for a compelling governmental interest was narrowed in _Employment
Division v. Smith_ (1990),[37] which held no such interest was required under
the Free Exercise Clause regarding a neutral law of general applicability that
happens to affect a religious practice, as opposed to a law that targets a
particular religious practice (which does require a compelling governmental
interest).[38] In _Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah_ (1993),[39]
the Supreme Court ruled Hialeah had passed an ordinance banning ritual
slaughter, a practice central to the Santería religion, while providing
exceptions for some practices such as the kosher slaughter. Since the
ordinance was not "generally applicable", the Court ruled that it needed to
have a compelling interest, which it failed to have, and so was declared
unconstitutional.[40]

In 1993, the Congress passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA),
seeking to restore the compelling interest requirement applied in _Sherbert_
and _Yoder_. In _City of Boerne v. Flores_ (1997),[41] the Court struck down
the provisions of RFRA that forced state and local governments to provide
protections exceeding those required by the First Amendment, on the grounds
that while the Congress could enforce the Supreme Court's interpretation of a
constitutional right, the Congress could not impose its own interpretation on
states and localities.[42] According to the court's ruling in _Gonzales v.
UDV_ (2006),[43] RFRA remains applicable to federal laws and so those laws
must still have a "compelling interest".[44]

## Freedom of speech and of the press

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/59/First_Amendment_inscription.JPG/220px-

First_Amendment_inscription.JPG)

Inscription of the First Amendment (December 15, 1791) in front of
Independence Hall in Philadelphia

Further information: Freedom of speech in the United States and United States
free speech exceptions

### Wording of the clause

The First Amendment bars Congress from "abridging the freedom of speech, or of
the press...." U.S. Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens commented about
this phraseology in a 1993 journal article: "I emphasize the word 'the' in the
term 'the freedom of speech' because the definite article suggests that the
draftsmen intended to immunize a previously identified category or subset of
speech." Stevens said that, otherwise, the clause might absurdly immunize
things like false testimony under oath.[45] Like Stevens, journalist Anthony
Lewis wrote: "The word 'the' can be read to mean what was understood at the
time to be included in the concept of free speech."[46] But what was
understood at the time is not 100% clear.[47] In the late 1790s, the lead
author of the speech and press clauses, James Madison, argued against
narrowing this freedom to what had existed under English common law:

> The practice in America must be entitled to much more respect. In every
state, probably, in the Union, the press has exerted a freedom in canvassing
the merits and measures of public men, of every description, which has not
been confined to the strict limits of the common law.[48]

Madison wrote this in 1799, when he was in a dispute about the
constitutionality of the Alien and Sedition Laws, which was legislation
enacted in 1798 by President John Adams' Federalist Party to ban seditious
libel. Madison believed that legislation to be unconstitutional, and his
adversaries in that dispute, such as John Marshall, advocated the narrow
freedom of speech that had existed in the English common law.[48]

### Speech critical of the government

The Supreme Court declined to rule on the constitutionality of any federal law
regarding the Free Speech Clause until the 20th century. For example, the
Supreme Court never ruled on the Alien and Sedition Acts; three Supreme Court
justices riding circuit presided over sedition trials without indicating any
reservations.[49] The leading critics of the law, Vice President Thomas
Jefferson and James Madison, argued for the Acts' unconstitutionality based on
the First Amendment and other Constitutional provisions.[50] Jefferson
succeeded Adams as president, in part due to the unpopularity of the latter's
sedition prosecutions; he and his party quickly overturned the Acts and
pardoned those imprisoned by them.[51] In the majority opinion in _New York
Times Co. v. Sullivan_ (1964),[52] the Court noted the importance of this
public debate as a precedent in First Amendment law and ruled that the Acts
had been unconstitutional: "Although the Sedition Act was never tested in this
Court, the attack upon its validity has carried the day in the court of
history."[53][54]

#### World War I

During the patriotic fervor of World War I and the First Red Scare, the
Espionage Act of 1917 imposed a maximum sentence of twenty years for anyone
who caused or attempted to cause "insubordination, disloyalty, mutiny, or
refusal of duty in the military or naval forces of the United States".
Specifically, the Espionage Act of 1917 states that if anyone allows any
enemies to enter or fly over the United States and obtain information from a
place connected with the national defense, they will be punished.[55] Hundreds
of prosecutions followed.[56] In 1919, the Supreme Court heard four appeals
resulting from these cases: _Schenck v. United States_ , _Debs v. United
States_ , _Frohwerk v. United States_ , and _Abrams v. United States_.[57]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/95/Oliver_Wendell_Holmes_Jr_circa_1930-edit.jpg/180px-

Oliver_Wendell_Holmes_Jr_circa_1930-edit.jpg)

Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes formulated the clear and present danger test for
free speech cases.

In the first of these cases, Socialist Party of America official Charles
Schenck had been convicted under the Espionage Act for publishing leaflets
urging resistance to the draft.[58] Schenck appealed, arguing that the
Espionage Act violated the Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment. In
_Schenck v. United States_ , the Supreme Court unanimously rejected Schenck's
appeal and affirmed his conviction.[59] This conviction continued to be
debated over whether _Schenck_ went against the right to freedom of speech
protected by the First Amendment.[60] Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.,
writing for the Court, explained that "the question in every case is whether
the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to
create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive
evils that Congress has a right to prevent."[61] One week later, in _Frohwerk
v. United States_ , the court again upheld an Espionage Act conviction, this
time that of a journalist who had criticized U.S. involvement in foreign
wars.[62]

In _Debs v. United States_ , the Court elaborated on the "clear and present
danger" test established in _Schenck_.[63] On June 16, 1918, Eugene V. Debs, a
political activist, delivered a speech in Canton, Ohio, in which he spoke of
"most loyal comrades were paying the penalty to the working class – these
being Wagenknecht, Baker and Ruthenberg, who had been convicted of aiding and
abetting another in failing to register for the draft."[64] Following his
speech, Debs was charged and convicted under the Espionage Act. In upholding
his conviction, the Court reasoned that although he had not spoken any words
that posed a "clear and present danger", taken in context, the speech had a
"natural tendency and a probable effect to obstruct the recruiting
services".[65][66] In _Abrams v. United States_ , four Russian refugees
appealed their conviction for throwing leaflets from a building in New York;
the leaflets argued against President Woodrow Wilson's intervention in Russia
against the October Revolution. The majority upheld their conviction, but
Holmes and Justice Louis Brandeis dissented, holding that the government had
demonstrated no "clear and present danger" in the four's political
advocacy.[62]

#### Extending protections

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a6/Brandeisl.jpg/220px-

Brandeisl.jpg)

Justice Louis Brandeis wrote several dissents in the 1920s upholding free
speech claims.

The Supreme Court denied a number of Free Speech Clause claims throughout the
1920s, including the appeal of a labor organizer, Benjamin Gitlow, who had
been convicted after distributing a manifesto calling for a "revolutionary
dictatorship of the proletariat".[67] In _Gitlow v. New York_ (1925), the
Court upheld the conviction, but a majority also found that the First
Amendment applied to state laws as well as federal laws, via the Due Process
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.[68][69] Holmes and Brandeis dissented in
several more cases in this decade, however, advancing the argument that the
Free Speech Clause protected a far greater range of political speech than the
Court had previously acknowledged. In _Whitney v. California_ (1927),[70] in
which Communist Party USA organizer Charlotte Anita Whitney had been arrested
for "criminal syndicalism", Brandeis wrote a dissent in which he argued for
broader protections for political speech:

> Those who won our independence ... believed that freedom to think as you
will and to speak as you think are means indispensable to the discovery and
spread of political truth; that without free speech and assembly discussion
would be futile; that with them, discussion affords ordinarily adequate
protection against the dissemination of noxious doctrine; that the greatest
menace to freedom is an inert people; that public discussion is a political
duty; and that this should be a fundamental principle of the American
government.[71]

In _Herndon v. Lowry_ (1937), the Court heard the case of African American
Communist Party organizer Angelo Herndon, who had been convicted under the
Slave Insurrection Statute for advocating black rule in the southern United
States. In a 5–4 decision, the Court reversed Herndon's conviction, holding
that Georgia had failed to demonstrate that there was any "clear and present
danger" in Herndon's political advocacy.[72]

In 1940, Congress enacted the Smith Act, making it illegal to advocate "the
propriety of overthrowing or destroying any government in the United States by
force and violence".[73] The statute provided law enforcement a tool to combat
Communist leaders. Eugene Dennis was convicted in the Foley Square trial for
attempting to organize a Communist Party.[74] In _Dennis v. United States_
(1951),[75] the Court upheld the law, 6–2.[a][76] Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson
relied on Holmes' "clear and present danger" test as adapted by Learned Hand:
"In each case [courts] must ask whether the gravity of the 'evil', discounted
by its improbability, justifies such invasion of free speech as necessary to
avoid the danger."[77] Clearly, Vinson suggested, clear and present danger did
not intimate "that before the Government may act, it must wait until the
_putsch_ is about to be executed, the plans have been laid and the signal is
awaited."[78] In a concurring opinion, Justice Felix Frankfurter proposed a
"balancing test", which soon supplanted the "clear and present danger" test:

> The demands of free speech in a democratic society as well as the interest
in national security are better served by candid and informed weighing of the
competing interests, within the confines of the judicial process.[76]

In _Yates v. United States_ (1957), the Supreme Court limited the Smith Act
prosecutions to "advocacy of action" rather than "advocacy in the realm of
ideas". Advocacy of abstract doctrine remained protected while speech
explicitly inciting the forcible overthrow of the government was punishable
under the Smith Act.[79][80]

During the Vietnam War, the Court's position on public criticism of the
government changed drastically. Though the Court upheld a law prohibiting the
forgery, mutilation, or destruction of draft cards in _United States v.
O'Brien_ (1968),[81] fearing that burning draft cards would interfere with the
"smooth and efficient functioning" of the draft system,[82][83] the next year,
the court handed down its decision in _Brandenburg v. Ohio_ (1969),[84]
expressly overruling _Whitney v. California_.[85] _Brandenburg_ discarded the
"clear and present danger" test introduced in _Schenck_ and further eroded
_Dennis_.[86][87] Now the Supreme Court referred to the right to speak openly
of violent action and revolution in broad terms:

> [Our] decisions have fashioned the principle that the constitutional
guarantees of free speech and free press do not allow a State to forbid or
proscribe advocacy of the use of force or law violation except where such
advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is
likely to incite or cause such action.[88]

In _Cohen v. California_ (1971),[89] the Court voted 5–4 to reverse the
conviction of a man wearing a jacket reading "Fuck the Draft" in the corridors
of a Los Angeles County courthouse. Justice John Marshall Harlan II wrote in
the majority opinion that Cohen's jacket fell in the category of protected
political speech despite the use of an expletive: "one man's vulgarity is
another man's lyric."[90]

### Political speech

#### Anonymous speech

In _Talley v. California_ (1960),[91] the Court struck down a Los Angeles city
ordinance that made it a crime to distribute anonymous pamphlets. Justice Hugo
Black wrote in the majority opinion: "There can be no doubt that such an
identification requirement would tend to restrict freedom to distribute
information and thereby freedom of expression .... Anonymous pamphlets,
leaflets, brochures and even books have played an important role in the
progress of mankind."[92] In _McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission_
(1995),[93] the Court struck down an Ohio statute that made it a crime to
distribute anonymous campaign literature.[94] However, in _Meese v. Keene_
(1987),[95] the Court upheld the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938,
under which several Canadian films were defined as "political propaganda",
requiring their sponsors to be identified.[96]

#### Campaign finance

See also: Campaign finance reform in the United States

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3f/Sen_Mitch_McConnell_official.jpg/220px-

Sen_Mitch_McConnell_official.jpg)

U.S. Senator Mitch McConnell, plaintiff in _McConnell v. Federal Election
Commission_

In _Buckley v. Valeo_ (1976),[97] the Supreme Court reviewed the Federal
Election Campaign Act of 1971 and related laws, which restricted the monetary
contributions that may be made to political campaigns and expenditure by
candidates. The Court affirmed the constitutionality of limits on campaign
contributions, stating that they "serve[d] the basic governmental interest in
safeguarding the integrity of the electoral process without directly impinging
upon the rights of individual citizens and candidates to engage in political
debate and discussion."[98] However, the Court overturned the spending limits,
which it found imposed "substantial restraints on the quantity of political
speech."[99][100]

The court again scrutinized campaign finance regulation in _McConnell v.
Federal Election Commission_ (2003).[101] The case centered on the Bipartisan
Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (BCRA), a federal law that imposed new
restrictions on campaign financing. The Supreme Court upheld provisions which
barred the raising of soft money by national parties and the use of soft money
by private organizations to fund certain advertisements related to elections.
However, the Court struck down the "choice of expenditure" rule, which
required that parties could either make coordinated expenditures for all its
candidates, or permit candidates to spend independently, but not both, which
the Court agreed "placed an unconstitutional burden on the parties' right to
make unlimited independent expenditures."[102] The Court also ruled that the
provision preventing minors from making political contributions was
unconstitutional, relying on _Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community
School District_.

In _Federal Election Commission v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc._ (2007),[103]
the Court sustained an "as applied" challenge to BCRA, holding that issue ads
may not be banned from the months preceding a primary or general election. In
_Davis v. Federal Election Commission_ (2008),[104] the Supreme Court declared
the "Millionaire's Amendment" provisions of the BCRA to be unconstitutional.
The Court held that easing BCRA restrictions for an opponent of a self-
financing candidate spending at least $350,000 of his or her own money
violated the freedom of speech of the self-financing candidate.[105]

In _Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission_ (2010),[106] the Court
ruled that the BCRA's federal restrictions on electoral advocacy by
corporations or unions were unconstitutional for violating the Free Speech
Clause of the First Amendment. The Court overruled _Austin v. Michigan Chamber
of Commerce_ (1990),[107] which had upheld a state law that prohibited
corporations from using treasury funds to support or oppose candidates in
elections did not violate the First or Fourteenth Amendments. The Court also
overruled the portion of _McConnell_ that upheld such restrictions under the
BCRA.[108] In other words, the ruling was considered to hold that "political
spending is a form of protected speech under the First Amendment".[109]

In _McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission_ (2014),[110] the Court ruled
that federal aggregate limits on how much a person can donate to candidates,
political parties, and political action committees, combined respectively in a
two-year period known as an "election cycle," violated the Free Speech Clause
of the First Amendment.[111]

#### Flag desecration

The divisive issue of flag desecration as a form of protest first came before
the Supreme Court in _Street v. New York_ (1969).[112] In response to hearing
an erroneous report of the murder of civil rights activist James Meredith,
Sidney Street burned a 48-star U.S. flag. Street was arrested and charged with
a New York state law making it a crime "publicly [to] mutilate, deface,
defile, or defy, trample upon, or cast contempt upon either by words or act
[any flag of the United States]."[113] In a 5–4 decision, the Court, relying
on _Stromberg v. California_ (1931),[114] found that because the provision of
the New York law criminalizing "words" against the flag was unconstitutional,
and the trial did not sufficiently demonstrate that he was convicted solely
under the provisions not yet deemed unconstitutional, the conviction was
unconstitutional. The Court, however, "resist[ed] the pulls to decide the
constitutional issues involved in this case on a broader basis" and left the
constitutionality of flag-burning unaddressed.[115][116]

The ambiguity with regard to flag-burning statutes was eliminated in _Texas v.
Johnson_ (1989).[117] In that case, Gregory Lee Johnson burned an American
flag at a demonstration during the 1984 Republican National Convention in
Dallas, Texas. Charged with violating a Texas law prohibiting the vandalizing
of venerated objects, Johnson was convicted, sentenced to one year in prison,
and fined $2,000. The Supreme Court reversed his conviction in a 5–4 vote.
Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. wrote in the decision that "if there is a
bedrock principle underlying the First Amendment, it is that government may
not prohibit the expression of an idea simply because society finds the idea
offensive or disagreeable."[118] Congress then passed a federal law barring
flag burning, but the Supreme Court struck it down as well in _United States
v. Eichman_ (1990).[119][120] A Flag Desecration Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution has been proposed repeatedly in Congress since 1989, and in 2006
failed to pass the Senate by a single vote.[121]

#### Falsifying military awards

While the unauthorized wear or sale of the Medal of Honor has been a
punishable offense under federal law since the early 20th century,[122][123]
the Stolen Valor Act criminalized the act of not only wearing, but also
verbally claiming entitlement to military awards that a person did not in fact
earn.[124] In _United States v. Alvarez_ (2012), the Supreme Court struck down
the Act, ruling that the First Amendment bars the government from punishing
people for making false claims regarding military service or honors where the
false claim was not "made to effect a fraud or secure moneys or other valuable
considerations." The decision was a 6–3 ruling, but the six justices in the
majority could not agree on a single rationale for it.[125]

### Compelled speech

Main article: Compelled speech

The Supreme Court has determined that the First Amendment also protects
citizens from being compelled to say or pay for certain speech.

In _West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette_ (1943), the Court
ruled that school children could not be punished for refusing either to say
the pledge of allegiance or salute the American flag.

In _National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra_ (2018), the
Court ruled that a California law that required crisis pregnancy centers to
post notices informing patients that they can obtain free or low-cost
abortions and include the number of the state agency that can connect the
women with abortion providers violated those centers' right to free
speech.[126]

In _Janus v. AFSCME_ (2018), the Court ruled that requiring a public sector
employee to pay dues to a union to which he is not a member violated the First
Amendment. According to the Court, “the First Amendment does not permit the
government to compel a person to pay for another party’s speech just because
the government thinks that the speech furthers the interests of the person who
does not want to pay.”[127]

### Commercial speech

Main article: Commercial speech

Commercial speech is speech done on behalf of a company or individual for the
purpose of making a profit. Unlike political speech, the Supreme Court does
not afford commercial speech full protection under the First Amendment. To
effectively distinguish commercial speech from other types of speech for
purposes of litigation, the Court uses a list of four indicia:[128]

  1. The contents do "no more than propose a commercial transaction".
  2. The contents may be characterized as advertisements.
  3. The contents reference a specific product.
  4. The disseminator is economically motivated to distribute the speech.

Alone, each indicium does not compel the conclusion that an instance of speech
is commercial; however, "[t]he combination of _all_ these characteristics ...
provides strong support for ... the conclusion that the [speech is] properly
characterized as commercial speech."[129]

In _Valentine v. Chrestensen_ (1942),[130] the Court upheld a New York City
ordinance forbidding the "distribution in the streets of commercial and
business advertising matter."[131] Writing for a unanimous court, Justice Owen
Roberts explained:

> This court has unequivocally held that streets are proper places for the
exercise of the freedom of communicating information and disseminating opinion
and that, though the states and municipalities may appropriately regulate the
privilege in the public interest, they may not unduly burden or proscribe its
employment in their public thoroughfares. We are equally clear that the
Constitution imposes no such restraint on government as respects purely
commercial advertising.[132]

In _Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council_
(1976),[133] the Court overruled _Valentine_ and ruled that commercial speech
was entitled to First Amendment protection:

> What is at issue is whether a State may completely suppress the
dissemination of concededly truthful information about entirely lawful
activity, fearful of that information's effect upon its disseminators and its
recipients .... [W]e conclude that the answer to this one is in the
negative.[134]

In _Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Association_ (1978),[135] the Court ruled that
commercial speech was not protected by the First Amendment as much as other
types of speech:

> We have not discarded the "common-sense" distinction between speech
proposing a commercial transaction, which occurs in an area traditionally
subject to government regulation, and other varieties of speech. To require a
parity of constitutional protection for commercial and noncommercial speech
alike could invite a dilution, simply by a leveling process, of the force of
the [First] Amendment's guarantee with respect to the latter kind of
speech.[136]

In _Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission_
(1980),[137] the Court clarified what analysis was required before the
government could justify regulating commercial speech:

  1. Is the expression protected by the First Amendment? Lawful? Misleading? Fraud?
  2. Is the asserted government interest substantial?
  3. Does the regulation directly advance the governmental interest asserted?
  4. Is the regulation more extensive than is necessary to serve that interest?

Six years later, the U.S. Supreme Court, applying the _Central Hudson_
standards in _Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto
Rico_ (1986),[138] affirmed the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico's conclusion that
Puerto Rico's _Games of Chance Act of 1948_ , including the regulations
thereunder, was not facially unconstitutional. The lax interpretation of
_Central Hudson_ adopted by _Posadas_ was soon restricted under _44
Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island_ (1996),[139] when the Court invalidated a
Rhode Island law prohibiting the publication of liquor prices.

### School speech

Main article: School speech

In _Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District_ (1969),[140]
the Supreme Court extended free speech rights to students in school. The case
involved several students who were punished for wearing black armbands to
protest the Vietnam War. The Court ruled that the school could not restrict
symbolic speech that did not "materially and substantially" interrupt school
activities.[141] Justice Abe Fortas wrote:

> First Amendment rights, applied in light of the special characteristics of
the school environment, are available to teachers and students. It can hardly
be argued that either students or teachers shed their constitutional rights to
freedom of speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate .... [S]chools may not
be enclaves of totalitarianism. School officials do not possess absolute
authority over their students. Students ... are possessed of fundamental
rights which the State must respect, just as they themselves must respect
their obligations to the State.[142]

In _Healy v. James_ (1972), the Court ruled that Central Connecticut State
College's refusal to recognize a campus chapter of Students for a Democratic
Society was unconstitutional, reaffirming _Tinker_.[143]

However, since 1969 the Court has also placed several limitations on _Tinker_
interpretations. In _Bethel School District v. Fraser_ (1986),[144] the Court
ruled that a student could be punished for his sexual-innuendo-laced speech
before a school assembly and, in _Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier_ (1988),[145] the
Court found that schools need not tolerate student speech that is inconsistent
with their basic educational mission.[146] In _Morse v. Frederick_
(2007),[147] the Court ruled that schools could, consistent with the First
Amendment, restrict student speech at school-sponsored events, even events
away from school grounds, if students promote "illegal drug use".[148]

### Internet access

In _Packingham v. North Carolina_ (2017), the Supreme Court held that a North
Carolina law prohibiting registered sex offenders from accessing various
websites impermissibly restricted lawful speech in violation of the First
Amendment.[149] The Court held that "a fundamental principle of the First
Amendment is that all persons have access to places where they can speak and
listen, and then, after reflection, speak and listen once more."[150][151]

### Obscenity

Further information: United States obscenity law

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ae/US_Supreme_Court_Justice_Potter_Stewart_-_1976_official_portrait.jpg/220px-

US_Supreme_Court_Justice_Potter_Stewart_-_1976_official_portrait.jpg)

Justice Potter Stewart wrote that while he could not precisely define
pornography, he "[knew] it when [he saw] it."

According to the U.S. Supreme Court, the First Amendment's protection of free
speech does not apply to obscene speech. Therefore, both the federal
government and the states have tried to prohibit or otherwise restrict obscene
speech, in particular the form that is now (2019) called pornography. At
present (2019) pornography, except for child pornography, is in practice free
of governmetal restrictions in tge United States, though pornography about
"extreme" sexual practices is occasionally prosecuted. The change in the
twentieth century from total prohibition in 1900 to near-total tolerance in
2000, reflects a series of court cases involving the definition of obscenity.
The U.S. Supreme Court has found that most pornography is not obscene, a
result of changing definitions of both obscenity and pornography.[10] The
legal tolerance also reflects changed social attitudes: one reason there are
so few prosecutions for pornography is that juries will not convict.

In _Rosen v. United States_ (1896), the Supreme Court adopted the same
obscenity standard as had been articulated in a famous British case, _Regina
v. Hicklin_ (1868).[152] The _Hicklin_ test defined material as obscene if it
tended "to deprave or corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral
influences, and into whose hands a publication of this sort may fall".[153] In
the early twentieth century, literary works including _An American Tragedy_
(Theodore Dreiser, 1925) and _Lady Chatterley's Lover_ (D.H. Lawrence, 1928)
were banned for obscenity. In the federal district court case _United States
v. One Book Called Ulysses_ (1933), Judge John M. Woolsey established a new
standard to evaluate James Joyce's novel _Ulysses_ (1922), stating that works
must be considered in their entirety, rather than declared obscene on the
basis of an individual part of the work.[154]

The Supreme Court ruled in _Roth v. United States_ (1957)[155] that the First
Amendment did not protect obscenity.[154] It also ruled that the _Hicklin_
test was inappropriate; instead, the _Roth_ test for obscenity was "whether to
the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant
theme of the material, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest".[156] This definition proved hard to apply, however, and in the
following decade, members of the Court often reviewed films individually in a
court building screening room to determine if they should be considered
obscene.[157] Justice Potter Stewart, in _Jacobellis v. Ohio_ (1964),[158]
famously stated that, although he could not precisely define pornography, "I
know it when I see it".[159][160]

The _Roth_ test was expanded when the Court decided _Miller v. California_
(1973).[161] Under the _Miller_ test, a work is obscene if:

> (a) ... 'the average person, applying contemporary community standards'
would find the work, as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest ... (b) ...
the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct
specifically defined by the applicable state law, and (c) ... the work, taken
as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value.[162]

Note that "community" standards—not national standards—are applied whether the
material appeals to the prurient interest, leaving the question of obscenity
to local authorities.[154] Child pornography is not subject to the _Miller_
test, as the Supreme Court decided in _New York v. Ferber_ (1982) and _Osborne
v. Ohio_ (1990),[163][164] ruling that the government's interest in protecting
children from abuse was paramount.[165][166]

Personal possession of obscene material in the home may not be prohibited by
law. In _Stanley v. Georgia_ (1969),[167] the Court ruled that "[i]f the First
Amendment means anything, it means that a State has no business telling a man,
sitting in his own house, what books he may read or what films he may
watch."[168] However, it is constitutionally permissible for the government to
prevent the mailing or sale of obscene items, though they may be viewed only
in private. _Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition_ (2002)[169] further upheld
these rights by invalidating the Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996,
holding that, because the act "[p]rohibit[ed] child pornography that does not
depict an actual child" it was overly broad and unconstitutional under the
First Amendment[170] and that:

> First Amendment freedoms are most in danger when the government seeks to
control thought or to justify its laws for that impermissible end. The right
to think is the beginning of freedom, and speech must be protected from the
government because speech is the beginning of thought.[171]

In _United States v. Williams_ (2008),[172] the Court upheld the PROTECT Act
of 2003, ruling that prohibiting offers to provide and requests to obtain
child pornography did not violate the First Amendment, even if a person
charged under the Act did not possess child pornography.[173][174]

### Memoirs of convicted criminals

In some states, there are Son of Sam laws prohibiting convicted criminals from
publishing memoirs for profit.[175] These laws were a response to offers to
David Berkowitz to write memoirs about the murders he committed. The Supreme
Court struck down a law of this type in New York as a violation of the First
Amendment in the case _Simon & Schuster v. Crime Victims Board_ (1991).[176]
That statute did not prohibit publication of a memoir by a convicted criminal.
Instead, it provided that all profits from the book were to be put in escrow
for a time. The interest from the escrow account was used to fund the New York
State Crime Victims Board – an organization that pays the medical and related
bills of victims of crime. Similar laws in other states remain
unchallenged.[177]

### Defamation

Further information: United States defamation law

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/49/US_Supreme_Court_Justice_William_Brennan_-_1976_official_portrait.jpg/220px-

US_Supreme_Court_Justice_William_Brennan_-_1976_official_portrait.jpg)

Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. wrote the landmark decision _New York Times
Co. v. Sullivan_ , requiring the demonstration of "actual malice" in libel
suits against public figures.

American tort liability for defamatory speech or publications traces its
origins to English common law. For the first two hundred years of American
jurisprudence, the basic substance of defamation law continued to resemble
that existing in England at the time of the Revolution. An 1898 American legal
textbook on defamation provides definitions of libel and slander nearly
identical to those given by William Blackstone and Edward Coke. An action of
slander required the following:[178]

  1. Actionable words, such as those imputing the injured party: is guilty of some offense, suffers from a contagious disease or psychological disorder, is unfit for public office because of moral failings or an inability to discharge his or her duties, or lacks integrity in profession, trade or business;
  2. That the charge must be false;
  3. That the charge must be articulated to a third person, verbally or in writing;
  4. That the words are not subject to legal protection, such as those uttered in Congress; and
  5. That the charge must be motivated by malice.

An action of libel required the same five general points as slander, except
that it specifically involved the publication of defamatory statements.[179]
For certain criminal charges of libel, such as seditious libel, the truth or
falsity of the statements was immaterial, as such laws were intended to
maintain public support of the government and true statements could damage
this support even more than false ones.[180] Instead, libel placed specific
emphasis on the result of the publication. Libelous publications tended to
"degrade and injure another person" or "bring him into contempt, hatred or
ridicule".[179]

Concerns that defamation under common law might be incompatible with the new
republican form of government caused early American courts to struggle between
William Blackstone's argument that the punishment of "dangerous or offensive
writings ... [was] necessary for the preservation of peace and good order, of
government and religion, the only solid foundations of civil liberty" and the
argument that the need for a free press guaranteed by the Constitution
outweighed the fear of what might be written.[180] Consequently, very few
changes were made in the first two centuries after the ratification of the
First Amendment.

The Supreme Court's ruling in _New York Times Co. v. Sullivan_ (1964)[52]
fundamentally changed American defamation law. The case redefined the type of
"malice" needed to sustain a libel case. Common law malice consisted of "ill-
will" or "wickedness". Now, a public officials seeking to sustain a civil
action against a tortfeasor needed to prove by "clear and convincing evidence"
that there was actual malice. The case involved an advertisement published in
_The New York Times_ indicating that officials in Montgomery, Alabama had
acted violently in suppressing the protests of African-Americans during the
civil rights movement. The Montgomery Police Commissioner, L. B. Sullivan,
sued the _Times_ for libel, stating that the advertisement damaged his
reputation. The Supreme Court unanimously reversed the $500,000 judgment
against the _Times_. Justice Brennan suggested that public officials may sue
for libel only if the publisher published the statements in question with
"actual malice"—"knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard of
whether it was false or not."[181][182] In sum, the court held that "the First
Amendment protects the publication of all statements, even false ones, about
the conduct of public officials except when statements are made with actual
malice (with knowledge that they are false or in reckless disregard of their
truth or falsity)."[183]

While actual malice standard applies to public officials and public
figures,[184] in _Philadelphia Newspapers v. Hepps_ (1988),[185] the Court
found that, with regard to private individuals, the First Amendment does "not
necessarily force any change in at least some features of the common-law
landscape."[186] In _Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc._
(1985)[187] the Court ruled that "actual malice" need not be shown in cases
involving private individuals, holding that "[i]n light of the reduced
constitutional value of speech involving no matters of public concern ... the
state interest adequately supports awards of presumed and punitive
damages—even absent a showing of 'actual malice.'"[188][189] In _Gertz v.
Robert Welch, Inc._ (1974), the Court ruled that a private individual had to
prove actual malice only to be awarded punitive damages, but not to seek
actual damages.[190][191] In _Hustler Magazine v. Falwell_ (1988),[192] the
Court extended the "actual malice" standard to intentional infliction of
emotional distress in a ruling which protected parody, in this case a fake
advertisement in _Hustler_ suggesting that evangelist Jerry Falwell's first
sexual experience had been with his mother in an outhouse. Since Falwell was a
public figure, the Court ruled that "importance of the free flow of ideas and
opinions on matters of public interest and concern" was the paramount concern,
and reversed the judgement Falwell had won against _Hustler_ for emotional
distress.[193]

In _Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co._ (1990),[194] the Court ruled that the
First Amendment offers no wholesale exception to defamation law for statements
labeled "opinion", but instead that a statement must be provably false
(falsifiable) before it can be the subject of a libel suit.[195] Nonetheless,
it has been argued that _Milkovich_ and other cases effectively provide for an
opinion privilege.[196] In consequence a significant number of states have
enacted state opinion privilege laws. [ _citation needed_ ]

### Private action

Despite the common misconception that the First Amendment prohibits anyone
from limiting free speech,[197] the text of the amendment only prohibits the
federal government, along with the states and local governments, from doing
so.[198]

State constitutions provide free speech protections similar to those of the
U.S. Constitution. In a few states, such as California, a state constitution
has been interpreted as providing more comprehensive protections than the
First Amendment. The Supreme Court has permitted states to extend such
enhanced protections, most notably in _Pruneyard Shopping Center v.
Robins_.[199] In that case, the Court unanimously ruled that while the First
Amendment may allow private property owners to prohibit trespass by political
speakers and petition-gatherers, California was permitted to restrict property
owners whose property is equivalent to a traditional public forum (often
shopping malls and grocery stores) from enforcing their private property
rights to exclude such individuals.[200] However, the Court did maintain that
shopping centers could impose "reasonable restrictions on expressive
activity".[201] Subsequently, New Jersey, Colorado, Massachusetts and Puerto
Rico courts have adopted the doctrine;[202][203] California's courts have
repeatedly reaffirmed it.[204]

### Freedom of the press

Further information: Freedom of the press in the United States

The free speech and free press clauses have been interpreted as providing the
same protection to speakers as to writers, except for wireless broadcasting
which has been given less constitutional protection.[205] The Free Press
Clause protects the right of individuals to express themselves through
publication and dissemination of information, ideas and opinions without
interference, constraint or prosecution by the government.[206][207] This
right was described in _Branzburg v. Hayes_ as "a fundamental personal right"
that is not confined to newspapers and periodicals.[208] In _Lovell v. City of
Griffin_ (1938),[209] Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes defined "press" as
"every sort of publication which affords a vehicle of information and
opinion".[210] This right has been extended to media including newspapers,
books, plays, movies, and video games.[211] While it is an open question
whether people who blog or use social media are journalists entitled to
protection by media shield laws,[212] they are protected equally by the Free
Speech Clause and the Free Press Clause, because both clauses do not
distinguish between media businesses and nonprofessional
speakers.[206][207][213][214] This is further shown by the Supreme Court
consistently refusing to recognize the First Amendment as providing greater
protection to the institutional media than to other speakers.[215][216][217]
For example, in a case involving campaign finance laws the Court rejected the
"suggestion that communication by corporate members of the institutional press
is entitled to greater constitutional protection than the same communication
by" non-institutional-press businesses.[218]

A landmark decision for press freedom came in _Near v. Minnesota_ (1931),[219]
in which the Supreme Court rejected prior restraint (pre-publication
censorship). In this case, the Minnesota legislature passed a statute allowing
courts to shut down "malicious, scandalous and defamatory newspapers",
allowing a defense of truth only in cases where the truth had been told "with
good motives and for justifiable ends".[220] In a 5–4 decision, the Court
applied the Free Press Clause to the states, rejecting the statute as
unconstitutional. Hughes quoted Madison in the majority decision, writing,
"The impairment of the fundamental security of life and property by criminal
alliances and official neglect emphasizes the primary need of a vigilant and
courageous press".[221]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/23/Daniel_Ellsberg_2006.jpg/220px-

Daniel_Ellsberg_2006.jpg)

The leak of the Pentagon Papers by Daniel Ellsberg (pictured here in 2006) led
to _New York Times Co. v. United States_ (1971), a landmark press freedom
decision.

However, _Near_ also noted an exception, allowing prior restraint in cases
such as "publication of sailing dates of transports or the number or location
of troops".[222] This exception was a key point in another landmark case four
decades later: _New York Times Co. v. United States_ (1971),[223] in which the
administration of President Richard Nixon sought to ban the publication of the
Pentagon Papers, classified government documents about the Vietnam War
secretly copied by analyst Daniel Ellsberg. The Court found, 6–3, that the
Nixon administration had not met the heavy burden of proof required for prior
restraint. Justice Brennan, drawing on _Near_ in a concurrent opinion, wrote
that "only governmental allegation and proof that publication must inevitably,
directly, and immediately cause the occurrence of an evil kindred to
imperiling the safety of a transport already at sea can support even the
issuance of an interim restraining order." Justices Black and Douglas went
still further, writing that prior restraints were never justified.[224]

The courts have rarely treated content-based regulation of journalism with any
sympathy. In _Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo_ (1974),[225] the Court
unanimously struck down a state law requiring newspapers criticizing political
candidates to publish their responses. The state claimed that the law had been
passed to ensure journalistic responsibility. The Supreme Court found that
freedom, but not responsibility, is mandated by the First Amendment and so it
ruled that the government may not force newspapers to publish that which they
do not desire to publish.[226]

Content-based regulation of television and radio, however, have been sustained
by the Supreme Court in various cases. Since there is a limited number of
frequencies for non-cable television and radio stations, the government
licenses them to various companies. However, the Supreme Court has ruled that
the problem of scarcity does not allow the raising of a First Amendment issue.
The government may restrain broadcasters, but only on a content-neutral basis.
In _Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Foundation_ ,[227] the
Supreme Court upheld the Federal Communications Commission's authority to
restrict the use of "indecent" material in broadcasting.

State governments retain the right to tax newspapers, just as they may tax
other commercial products. Generally, however, taxes that focus exclusively on
newspapers have been found unconstitutional. In _Grosjean v. American Press
Co._ (1936),[228] the Court invalidated a state tax on newspaper advertising
revenues, holding that the role of the press in creating "informed public
opinion" was vital.[229] Similarly, some taxes that give preferential
treatment to the press have been struck down. In _Arkansas Writers' Project v.
Ragland_ (1987),[230] for instance, the Court invalidated an Arkansas law
exempting "religious, professional, trade and sports journals" from taxation
since the law amounted to the regulation of newspaper content. In _Leathers v.
Medlock_ (1991),[231] the Supreme Court found that states may treat different
types of the media differently, such as by taxing cable television, but not
newspapers. The Court found that "differential taxation of speakers, even
members of the press, does not implicate the First Amendment unless the tax is
directed at, or presents the danger of suppressing, particular ideas."[232]

In _Branzburg v. Hayes_ (1972),[233] the Court ruled that the First Amendment
did not give a journalist the right to refuse a subpoena from a grand jury.
The issue decided in the case was whether a journalist could refuse to "appear
and testify before state and Federal grand juries" basing the refusal on the
belief that such appearance and testimony "abridges the freedom of speech and
press guaranteed by the First Amendment".[234] The 5–4 decision was that such
a protection was not provided by the First Amendment. However, a concurring
opinion by Justice Lewis F. Powell, in which he stated that a claim for press
privilege "should be judged on its facts by the striking of a proper balance
between freedom of the press and the obligation of all citizens to give
relevant testimony with respect to criminal conduct. The balance of these
vital constitutional and societal interests on a case-by-case basis accords
with the tried and traditional way of adjudicating such questions.", has been
frequently cited by lower courts since the decision.[235]

## Petition and assembly

Further information: Right to petition in the United States and Freedom of
assembly

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Chief_Justice_Morrison_Waite.jpg/220px-

Chief_Justice_Morrison_Waite.jpg)

Chief Justice Morrison Waite ruled in _United States v. Cruikshank_ (1875)
that the right of assembly was a secondary right to the right to petition.

The Petition Clause protects the right "to petition the government for a
redress of grievances".[206] This includes the right to communicate with
government officials, lobbying government officials and petitioning the courts
by filing lawsuits with a legal basis.[214] The Petition Clause first came to
prominence in the 1830s, when Congress established the gag rule barring anti-
slavery petitions from being heard; the rule was overturned by Congress
several years later. Petitions against the Espionage Act of 1917 resulted in
imprisonments. The Supreme Court did not rule on either issue.[236]

In _California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited_ ,[237] the Supreme
Court stated that the right to petition encompass "the approach of citizens or
groups of them to administrative agencies (which are both creatures of the
legislature, and arms of the executive) and to courts, the third branch of
Government. Certainly the right to petition extends to all departments of the
Government. The right of access to the courts is indeed but one aspect of the
right of petition."[238] Today thus this right encompasses petitions to all
three branches of the federal government—the Congress, the executive and the
judiciary—and has been extended to the states through incorporation.[236][239]
According to the Supreme Court, "redress of grievances" is to be construed
broadly: it includes not solely appeals by the public to the government for
the redressing of a grievance in the traditional sense, but also, petitions on
behalf of private interests seeking personal gain.[240] The right not only
protects demands for "a redress of grievances" but also demands for government
action.[236][240] The petition clause includes according to the Supreme Court
the opportunity to institute non-frivolous lawsuits and mobilize popular
support to change existing laws in a peaceful manner.[239]

In _Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri_ (2011),[241] the Supreme Court stated
regarding the Free Speech Clause and the Petition Clause:

> It is not necessary to say that the two Clauses are identical in their
mandate or their purpose and effect to acknowledge that the rights of speech
and petition share substantial common ground .... Both speech and petition are
integral to the democratic process, although not necessarily in the same way.
The right to petition allows citizens to express their ideas, hopes, and
concerns to their government and their elected representatives, whereas the
right to speak fosters the public exchange of ideas that is integral to
deliberative democracy as well as to the whole realm of ideas and human
affairs. Beyond the political sphere, both speech and petition advance
personal expression, although the right to petition is generally concerned
with expression directed to the government seeking redress of a
grievance.[241]

The right of assembly was originally distinguished from the right to petition.
In _United States v. Cruikshank_ (1875),[242] the Supreme Court held that

> the right of the people peaceably to assemble for the purpose of petitioning
Congress for a redress of grievances, or for anything else connected with the
powers or duties of the National Government, is an attribute of national
citizenship, and, as such, under protection of, and guaranteed by, the United
States. The very idea of a government, republican in form, implies a right on
the part of its citizens to meet peaceably for consultation in respect to
public affairs and to petition for a redress of grievances.[243]

Justice Morrison Waite's opinion for the Court carefully distinguished the
right to peaceably assemble as a secondary right, while the right to petition
was labeled to be a primary right. Later cases, however, paid less attention
to these distinctions.[236]

In two 1960s decisions collectively known as forming the Noerr-Pennington
doctrine,[b] the Court established that the right to petition prohibited the
application of antitrust law to statements made by private entities before
public bodies: a monopolist may freely go before the city council and
encourage the denial of its competitor's building permit without being subject
to Sherman Act liability.[244]

## Freedom of association

Further information: Freedom of association § United States Constitution

Although the First Amendment does not explicitly mention freedom of
association, the Supreme Court ruled, in _National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People v. Alabama_ (1958),[245][246] that this freedom
was protected by the Amendment and that privacy of membership was an essential
part of this freedom.[247] The U.S. Supreme Court decided in _Roberts v.
United States Jaycees_ (1984) that "implicit in the right to engage in
activities protected by the First Amendment" is "a corresponding right to
associate with others in pursuit of a wide variety of political, social,
economic, educational, religious, and cultural ends".[248] In _Roberts_ the
Court held that associations may not exclude people for reasons unrelated to
the group's expression, such as gender.[249]

However, in _Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of
Boston_ (1995),[250] the Court ruled that a group may exclude people from
membership if their presence would affect the group's ability to advocate a
particular point of view.[251] Likewise, in _Boy Scouts of America v. Dale_
(2000),[252] the Court ruled that a New Jersey law, which forced the Boy
Scouts of America to admit an openly gay member, to be an unconstitutional
abridgment of the Boy Scouts' right to free association.[253]

## See also

  * Freedom of Speech
  * Censorship in the United States
  * Freedom of thought
  * Free speech zones
  * Government speech
  * List of amendments to the United States Constitution
  * List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment
  * Marketplace of ideas
  * Military expression
  * Photography is Not a Crime
  * Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom
  * Williamsburg Charter
  * First Amendment audits

## References

**Notes**

  1. **^** Justice Tom C. Clark did not participate because he had ordered the prosecutions when he was Attorney General.
  2. **^** _Eastern Railroad Presidents Conference v. Noerr Motor Freight, Inc_ (1961) and _United Mine Workers v. Pennington_ (1965)

**Citations**

  1. **^** "First Amendment". Cornell University Law School Legal Information Institute. Archived from the original on May 4, 2013. Retrieved May 3, 2013.
  2. **^** Lewis 2007, pp. 6–7.
  3. **^** Beeman 2009, pp. 341–43.
  4. **^** Haynes, Charles, et al. _The First Amendment in Schools: A Guide from the First Amendment Center_ , p. 13 (Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development, 2003). Madison also proposed a similar limitation upon the states, which was completely rejected: "No State shall violate the equal rights of conscience, or the freedom of the press, or the trial by jury in criminal cases." Madison, James. "House of Representatives, Amendments to the Constitution" (June 8, 1789) via _The Founders' Constitution_.
  5. **^** Jasper 1999, p. 2.
  6. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 10.
  7. **^** "Bill of Rights". National Archives. Archived from the original on April 4, 2013. Retrieved April 4, 2013.
  8. **^** "The New United States of America Adopted the Bill of Rights: December 15, 1791". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on April 4, 2013. Retrieved April 4, 2013.
  9. **^** "Jefferson's Letter to the Danbury Baptists – The Final Letter, as Sent on January 1, 1802". Library of Congress. Retrieved February 13, 2014.
  10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Eugene Volokh. "First Amendment". _Encyclopædia Britannica_. Archived from the original on April 11, 2013. Retrieved April 11, 2013.
  11. **^** Daniel L. Driesbach, _Thomas Jefferson and the Wall of Separation between Church and State_ NYU Press 2002, unpaginated.
  12. **^** _Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet_ , 512 U.S. 687 (1994).
  13. **^** _Grumet_ , 512 U.S. at 703.
  14. **^** _Van Orden v. Perry_ , 545 U.S. 677 (2005).
  15. **^** _McCreary County v. ACLU_ , 545 U.S. 844 (2005).
  16. **^** _Salazar v. Buono_ , 559 U.S. 700 (2010).
  17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "In the words of [Thomas] Jefferson, the clause against establishment of religion by law was intended to erect "a wall of separation between church and State." from the _Everson_ decision
  18. **^** Madison, James (June 20, 1785). "Memorial and Remonstrance against Religious AssessmentsPapers". _The Founders' Constitution_. University of Chicago Press. pp. 8:298–304. Retrieved January 26, 2017.
  19. **^** Edward Mannino: _Shaping America: the Supreme Court and American society_ , University of South Carolina Press, 2000; p. 149; Daniel L. Driesbach, _Thomas Jefferson and the Wall of Separation between Church and State_ NYU Press 2002, unpaginated; Chap. 7.
  20. **^** Warren A. Nord, _Does God Make a Difference?_ , Oxford University Press, 2010.
  21. **^** "Excerpts From Ruling on Use of Education Money". _The New York Times_. June 11, 1998. Archived from the original on May 4, 2013. Retrieved May 3, 2013.
  22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kritzer, H. M.; Richards, M. J. (2003). "Jurisprudential Regimes and Supreme Court Decisionmaking: The Lemon Regime and Establishment Clause Cases". _Law & Society Review_. **37** : 827–40. doi:10.1046/j.0023-9216.2003.03704005.x.
  23. **^** "Freedom of Religion". _www.lincoln.edu_.
  24. **^** For the Endorsement test see _Lynch v. Donnelly_ , 465 U.S. 668 (1984).
  25. **^** For the coercion test see _Lee v. Weisman_ , 505 U.S. 577 (1992).
  26. **^** _Lemon v. Kurtzman_ , 403 U.S. 602 (1971)
  27. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ David Shultz. _Encyclopedia of the Supreme Court_. Infobase Publishing. p. 144. Retrieved December 31, 2007. "Accommodationists, on the other hand, read the establishment clause as prohibiting Congress from declaring a national religion or preferring one to another, but laws do not have to be shorn of morality and history to be declared constitutional. They apply _Lemon_ only selectively because "[w]e are a religious people whose institutions presuppose a Supreme Being" as Justice Douglas wrote in _Zorach v. Clauson_ 343 U.S. 306 (1952)."
  28. **^** Warren A. Nord. _Does God Make a Difference?_. Oxford University Press. Retrieved December 31, 2007. "First Amendment Politics: At the risk of oversimplifying a very complicated situation, I suggest that conservative justices tend to favor a weak reading of both the Free Exercise and Establishment clause, while liberals tend to favor strong readings. That is, conservative justices have been less concerned about the dangers of establishment and less concerned to protect free exercise rights, particularly of religious minorities. Liberals, by contrast, have been opposed to any possibility of a religious establishment and they have been relatively more concerned to protect the free exercise rights of minorities."
  29. **^** Robert Devigne. _Recasting Conservatism: Oakeshott, Strauss, and the Response to Postmodernism_. Yale University Press. Retrieved December 31, 2007. "Conservatives claim that liberals misinterpret the establishment and free exercise clauses of the First Amendment. They point to the opinion written for the Supreme Court by Hugo Black in _Everson v. Board of Education_ : "The 'establishment of religion' clause of the First Amendment means at least this: neither a state nor a Federal government can set up a church. Neither can pass laws which aid one religion, aid all religions or prefer one religion over another." The establishment clause, conservatives insist, precludes the national state from promoting any religious denomination but does not prohibit state governments and local communities from developing policies that encourage general religious beliefs that do not favor a particular sect and are consistent with the secular government's goals."
  30. **^** "Supreme Court Cases: Reynolds v. United States, 1879". _PHSchool.com_. Pearson Prentice Hall. Retrieved August 28, 2016.
  31. **^** "Reynolds v. United States – 98 U.S. 145 (1878)". Justia US Supreme Court Center.
  32. **^** "Cantwell v. Connecticut – 310 U.S. 296 (1940)". Justia US Supreme Court Center. Retrieved August 25, 2013.
  33. **^** _Sherbert v. Verner_ , 374 U.S. 398 (1963)
  34. **^** Richard E. Morgan (January 1, 2000). "Sherbert v. Verner 374 U.S. 398 (1963)". _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  35. **^** _Wisconsin v. Yoder_ , 406 U.S. 205 (1972)
  36. **^** Richard E. Morgan (January 1, 2000). "Wisconsin v. Yoder 406 U.S. 205 (1972)". _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  37. **^** _Employment Division v. Smith_ , 494 U.S. 872 (1990)
  38. **^** John G. West, Jr. (January 1, 2000). "Employment Division, Department of Human Resources of Oregon v. Smith 484 U.S. 872 (1990)". _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  39. **^** _Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah_ , 508 U.S. 520 (1993)
  40. **^** "Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. City of Hialeah 1993". _Supreme Court Drama: Cases that Changed America_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2001. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  41. **^** _City of Boerne v. Flores_ , 521 U.S. 507 (1997)
  42. **^** Steven A. Engel (October 1, 1999). "The McCulloch theory of the Fourteenth Amendment: City of Boerne v. Flores and the original understanding of section 5". _The Yale Law Journal_. Retrieved April 19, 2013 - via Questia Online Library.
  43. **^** _Gonzales v. UDV_ , 546 U.S. 418 (2006)
  44. **^** "Freedom of Religion". _American Law Yearkbook_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2006. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  45. **^** Stevens, John Paul. "The Freedom of Speech", _Yale Law Journal_ , Vol. 102, p. 1296 (1993).
  46. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 40.
  47. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 41.
  48. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dry, Murray. Civil Peace and the Quest for Truth: The First Amendment Freedoms in Political Philosophy and American Constitutionalism, pp. 68–70 (Lexington Books 2004).
  49. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 15.
  50. **^** Lewis 2007, pp. 16–17.
  51. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 20.
  52. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _New York Times Co. v. Sullivan_ , 376 U.S. 254 (1964)
  53. **^** _Sullivan_ , at 276
  54. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 53.
  55. **^** "Espionage Act, 1917". National Archives. Retrieved March 27, 2014.
  56. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 25.
  57. **^** Lewis 2007, pp. 25–27.
  58. **^** Abrams 2006, pp. 65–66.
  59. **^** _Schenck v. United States_ , 249 U.S. 47 (1919)
  60. **^** Stone, Geoffrey (2004). _Perilous Times: Free Speech in Wartime From the Sedition Act of 1798 to the War on Terrorism_. W. W. Norton and Company. ISBN 0393058808.
  61. **^** _Schenck_ , at 52
  62. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jasper 1999, p. 23.
  63. **^** _Debs v. United States_ , 249 U.S. 211 (1919)
  64. **^** _Debs_ , at 213
  65. **^** _Debs_ , at 216
  66. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 27.
  67. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 108.
  68. **^** Jasper 1999, p. 24.
  69. **^** Lewis 2007, pp. 34–35.
  70. **^** _Whitney v. California_ , 274 U.S. 357 (1927)
  71. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 36.
  72. **^** Jasper 1999, p. 26.
  73. **^** 18 U.S.C. § 2385
  74. **^** _Dennis_ , at 497
  75. **^** _Dennis v. United States_ 341 U.S. 494 (1951)
  76. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Jasper 1999, p. 28.
  77. **^** _Dennis_ , at 510
  78. **^** _Dennis_ , at 509
  79. **^** _Yates v. United States_ , 354 U.S. 298 (1957)
  80. **^** Jasper 1999, p. 29.
  81. **^** _United States v. O'Brien_ , 391 U.S. 367 (1968)
  82. **^** 50a U.S.C. § 462
  83. **^** _O'Brien_ , at 379
  84. **^** _Brandenburg v. Ohio_ , 395 U.S. 444 (1969)
  85. **^** Jasper 1999, p. 32.
  86. **^** _Brandenburg_ , at 450–1
  87. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 124.
  88. **^** _Brandenburg_ , at 447
  89. **^** _Cohen v. California_ , 403 U.S. 15 (1971)
  90. **^** Jasper 1999, p. 46.
  91. **^** _Talley v. California_ , 362 U.S. 60 (1960)
  92. **^** Chiger, Stephen J. (June 1, 2002). "Cybersmear: telecommunication's 200-year-old riddle". _Communications and the Law_. Retrieved April 11, 2013 - via Questia Online Library.
  93. **^** _McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission_ , 514 U.S. 334 (1995)
  94. **^** Biskupic, Joan (October 13, 1994). "Court Hears Case on Unsigned Leaflets". _The Washington Post_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 11, 2013.
  95. **^** _Meese v. Keene_ , 481 U.S. 465 (1987)
  96. **^** Kamen, Al (April 29, 1987). "Court Upholds Government Labeling Certain Foreign Films `Propaganda'". _The Washington Post_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 11, 2013.
  97. **^** _Buckley v. Valeo_ , 424 U.S. 1 (1976)
  98. **^** _Buckley_ , at 58
  99. **^** _Buckley_ , at 39
  100. **^** Lewis 2007, pp. 177–78.
  101. **^** _McConnell v. Federal Election Commission_ , 540 U.S. 93 (2003)
  102. **^** _McConnell_ , at 213
  103. **^** _Federal Election Commission v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc._ , 551 U.S. 449 (2007)
  104. **^** _Davis v. Federal Election Commission_ , 554 U.S. 724 (2008)
  105. **^** Samuel Gedge (June 22, 2009). "'Wholly foreign to the First Amendment': the demise of campaign finance's equalizing rationale in Davis v. Federal Election Commission". _Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy_. Retrieved April 11, 2013 - via Questia Online Library.
  106. **^** _Citizens United v. FEC_ , 558 U.S. 310 (2010).
  107. **^** _Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce_ , 494 U.S. 652 (1990)
  108. **^** See Part III of the Opinion of the Court in _Citizens United_
  109. **^** "Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission", SCOTUSblog, n.d. Retrieved November 1, 2012.
  110. **^** _McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission_ , 572 U.S. ___ (2014)
  111. **^** Howe, Amy (April 2, 2014). "Divided Court strikes down campaign contribution caps: In Plain English". SCOTUSblog. Retrieved April 11, 2014.
  112. **^** _Street v. New York_ , 394 U.S. 576 (1969).
  113. **^** _Street_ , 394 U.S. at 578 (quoting the New York Penal Law, §1425, subd. 16).
  114. **^** _Stromberg v. California_ , _Stromberg v. California_ , 283 U.S. 359 (1931).
  115. **^** _Street_ , 394 U.S. at 581.
  116. **^** Jasper 1999, p. 43.
  117. **^** _Texas v. Johnson_ , 491 U.S. 397 (1989)
  118. **^** _Johnson_ , at 414
  119. **^** _United States v. Eichman_ , 496 U.S. 310 (1990)
  120. **^** Jasper 1999, pp. 43–44.
  121. **^** Hulse, Carl; Holusha, John (June 27, 2006). "Amendment on Flag Burning Fails by One Vote in the Senate". _The New York Times_. Archived from the original on April 5, 2013. Retrieved April 4, 2013.
  122. **^** See Notes to 18 U.S.C. § 704, citing 42 Stat. 1286. Retrieved on June 30, 2012.
  123. **^** Pub.L. 103-322, The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, § 320109 (p. 318 of the PDF version). Retrieved on June 30, 2012.
  124. **^** Crewdson, John (May 27, 2008). "Fake claims of war heroics a federal offense". _Chicago Tribune_.
  125. **^** _United States v. Alvarez_ , 567 U.S. 709 (2012). ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/6/62/PD-icon.svg/15px-PD-icon.svg.png) _This article incorporatespublic domain material from this U.S government document._
  126. **^** Amy Howe (June 26, 2018). "Opinion analysis: Divided court rules for anti-abortion pregnancy centers in challenge to California law". SCOTUSblog. Retrieved June 27, 2018.
  127. **^** Amy Howe (June 27, 2018). "Opinion analysis: Court strikes down public-sector union fees". SCOTUSblog. Retrieved June 27, 2018.
  128. **^** _Bolger v. Youngs Drug Products_ , 463 U.S. 60 (1983)
  129. **^** _Bolger_ , 463 U.S. at 67.
  130. **^** _Valentine v. Chrestensen_ , 316 U.S. 52 (1942)
  131. **^** _Valentine_ , 316 U.S. at 53.
  132. **^** _Valentine_ , 316 U.S. at 54.
  133. **^** _Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council_ , 425 U.S. 748 (1976). ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/6/62/PD-icon.svg/15px-PD-icon.svg.png) _This article incorporatespublic domain material from this U.S government document._
  134. **^** _Virginia State Pharmacy Board_ , 425 U.S. at 773.
  135. **^** _Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Association_ , 436 U.S. 447 (1978). ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/6/62/PD-icon.svg/15px-PD-icon.svg.png) _This article incorporatespublic domain material from this U.S government document._
  136. **^** _Ohralik_ , 436 U.S. at 455.
  137. **^** _Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission_ , 447 U.S. 557 (1980)
  138. **^** _Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico_ , 478 U.S. 328 (1986)
  139. **^** _44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island_ , 517 U.S. 484 (1996)
  140. **^** _Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District_ , 393 U.S. 503 (1969)
  141. **^** Jasper 1999, p. 61.
  142. **^** " _Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District_ ". Retrieved April 11, 2013.
  143. **^** Jasper 1999, p. 62.
  144. **^** _Bethel School District v. Fraser_ , 478 U.S. 675 (1986)
  145. **^** _Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier_ , 484 U.S. 260 (1988)
  146. **^** Jasper 1999, pp. 62–63.
  147. **^** _Morse v. Frederick_ , 551 U.S. 393 (2007)
  148. **^** Kozlowski, Dan V.; Bullard, Melissa E.; Deets, Kristen (April 1, 2009). "Uncertain Rights: Student Speech and Conflicting Interpretations of Morse v. Frederick". _Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 11, 2013.
  149. **^** "Supreme Court strikes down North Carolina law banning sex offenders from social media".
  150. **^** "Packingham v. North Carolina". _www.oyez.org_.
  151. **^** "Packingham v. North Carolina" (PDF). _Supremecourt.gov_. Retrieved September 25, 2017.
  152. **^** _Regina v. Hicklin_ , [1868] L. R. 3 Q. B. 360
  153. **^** _Rosen_ , at 43
  154. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Obscenity". Legal Information Institute, Cornell University Law School. August 19, 2010. Archived from the original on April 11, 2013. Retrieved April 10, 2013.
  155. **^** _Roth v. United States_ , 354 U.S. 476 (1957)
  156. **^** _Roth_ , at 489
  157. **^** Lewis 2007, pp. 135–36.
  158. **^** _Jacobellis v. Ohio_ , 378 U.S. 184 (1964)
  159. **^** _Jacobellis_ , at 197
  160. **^** Peter Lattman (September 27, 2007). "The Origins of Justice Stewart's 'I Know It When I See It'". _Wall Street Journal_. LawBlog at The Wall Street Journal Online. Retrieved December 31, 2014.
  161. **^** _Miller v. California_ , 413 U.S. 15 (1973)
  162. **^** _Miller_ , at 39
  163. **^** _New York v. Ferber_ , 458 U.S. 747 (1982)
  164. **^** _Osborne v. Ohio_ , 495 U.S. 103 (1990)
  165. **^** _Ferber_ , at 761
  166. **^** Jasper 1999, p. 51.
  167. **^** _Stanley v. Georgia_ , 394 U.S. 557 (1969)
  168. **^** _Stanley_ , at 565
  169. **^** _Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition_ , 535 U.S. 234 (2002)
  170. **^** _Free Speech Coalition_ , at 240
  171. **^** _Free Speech Coalition_ , at 253
  172. **^** _United States v. Williams_ , 553 U.S. 285 (2008)
  173. **^** Opinion of the Court in _Williams_
  174. **^** Craig King (June 1, 2009). "Protecting children speech that crosses the line". _The FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin_. Retrieved April 11, 2013 - via Questia Online Library.
  175. **^** Madeleine Brand (July 22, 2004). "Interview: Julie Hilden discusses laws and ethics surrounding the intellectual property rights of prisoners". NPR – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2013.
  176. **^** _Simon & Schuster v. Crime Victims Board_ , 502 U.S. 105 (1991)
  177. **^** "Simon  & Schuster v. Members of the New York State Crime Victims Board 1991". _Supreme Court Drama: Cases That Changed America_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). 2001. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 10, 2013.
  178. **^** Newell 1898, pp. 37–41.
  179. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Newell 1898, pp. 33–37.
  180. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Nelson 1994, p. 93.
  181. **^** _Sullivan_ at 280
  182. **^** Jasper 1999, pp. 9–10.
  183. **^** "New York Times v. Sullivan". _The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law_. The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law. Retrieved March 11, 2014.
  184. **^** _Westmoreland v. CBS_ , 596 F. Supp. 363 (S.D. N.Y. 1984)
  185. **^** _Philadelphia Newspapers v. Hepps_ , 475 U.S. 767 (1988)
  186. **^** _Hepps_ at 775
  187. **^** _Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc._ 472 U.S. 749 (1985)
  188. **^** _Greenmoss_ at 761
  189. **^** "Dun  & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc. 472 U.S. 749 (1985)". _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  190. **^** _Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc._ 418 U.S. 323 (1974)
  191. **^** Leonard W. Levy (January 1, 2000). "Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc". _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  192. **^** _Hustler Magazine v. Falwell_ , 485 U.S. 46 (1988)
  193. **^** "Hustler Magazine v. Falwell 1988". _Supreme Court Drama: Cases that Changed America_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2001. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  194. **^** _Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co._ , 497 U.S. 1 (1990)
  195. **^** "Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co. 497 U.S. 1 (1990)". _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  196. **^** Esward M. Sussman, _Milkovich revisited: "Saving" the Opinion Privilege_ , Duke Law Journal, pp. 415–48
  197. **^** McGregor, Jena (August 8, 2017). "The Google memo is a reminder that we generally don't have free speech at work". _The Washington Post_. Retrieved March 1, 2019.
  198. **^** Willingham, AJ (September 6, 2018). "The First Amendment doesn't guarantee you the rights you think it does". _CNN_. Retrieved March 1, 2019.
  199. **^** _Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins_ , 447 U.S. 74 (1980)
  200. **^** Gregory C. Sisk (January 1, 2009). "Returning to the PruneYard: the unconstitutionality of state-sanctioned trespass in the name of speech". _Harvard Journal of Law and Public Property_. Retrieved April 19, 2013 - via Questia Online Library.
  201. **^** _Pruneyard_ , at 94
  202. **^** Mulligan, Josh (2004). "Finding A Forum in the Simulated City: Mega Malls, Gated Towns, and the Promise of _Pruneyard_ ". _Cornell Journal of Law and Public Policy_. **13** : 533, 557. ISSN 1069-0565.
  203. **^** _Empresas Puertorriqueñas de Desarrollo, Inc. v. Hermandad Independiente de Empleados Telefónicos_ , 150 D.P.R. 924 (2000).
  204. **^** _Golden Gateway Ctr. v. Golden Gateway Tenants Ass'n_ , 26 Cal. 4th 1013 (2001); _Costco Companies, Inc. v. Gallant_ , 96 Cal. App. 4th 740 (2002); _Fashion Valley Mall, LLC, v. National Labor Relations Board_ , 42 Cal. 4th 850 (2007)
  205. **^** Volokh, Eugene. _The Heritage Guide to the Constitution_ , p. 409 (Forte and Spalding, eds., The Heritage Foundation 2014).
  206. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "First Amendment: An Overview". _| Wex Legal Dictionary / Encyclopedia_. Legal Information Institute of the Cornell University. Retrieved April 18, 2014.
  207. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ McConnell, Michael W. (November 2013). "Reconsidering Citizens United as a Press Clause Case". _The Yale Law Journal_. 123 2013-2014 (2 November 2013 Pages 266–529). Retrieved April 19, 2014.
  208. **^** 408 U.S. 665 (1972)
  209. **^** _Lovell v. City of Griffin_ , 303 U.S. 444 (1938)
  210. **^** _Lovell_ , at 452
  211. **^** Adam Liptak (June 27, 2011). "Justices Reject Ban on Violent Video Games for Children". _The New York Times_. Archived from the original on April 19, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  212. **^** Mataconis, Doug (May 28, 2013). "Bloggers, Media Shield Laws, And The First Amendment". Outside The Beltway. Retrieved August 9, 2013.
  213. **^** Eugene Volokh (Gary T. Schwartz Professor of Law at Los Angeles School of Law of the University of California. "The American Heritage Foundation's Guide to the Constitution: Freedom of Speech and of the Press". The American Heritage Foundation. Retrieved April 18, 2014.
  214. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Eugene Volokh (January 8, 2014). "First Amendment (United States Constitution)". _Encyclopædia Britannica_. Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved April 18, 2014.
  215. **^** See _Bartnicki v. Vopper_ , 532 U.S. 514 (2001) where the U.S. Supreme Court "draw no distinction between the media respondents and" a non-institutional respondent.
  216. **^** See _Cohen v. Cowles Media Co._ , 501 U.S. 663 (1991) where the U.S. Supreme Court held that the press gets no special immunity from laws that apply to others, including those—such as copyright law—that target communication.
  217. **^** See also _Henry v. Collins_ , 380 U.S. 356, 357 (1965) (per curiam) (applying _Sullivan_ standard to a statement by an arrestee); _Garrison v. Louisiana_ , 379 U.S. 64, 67–68 (1964) (applying Sullivan standard to statements by an elected district attorney); _New York Times Co. v. Sullivan_ , 376 U.S. at 286 (applying identical First Amendment protection to a newspaper defendant and individual defendants).
  218. **^** _First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti_ , 435 U.S. 765 (1978)
  219. **^** _Near v. Minnesota_ , 283 U.S. 697 (1931)
  220. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 43.
  221. **^** Lewis 2007, pp. 44–45.
  222. **^** Lewis 2007, pp. 46–47.
  223. **^** _New York Times Co. v. United States_ , 403 U.S. 713 (1971)
  224. **^** Frederick Schauer (January 1, 2000). "New York Times Co. v. United States 403 U.S. 713 (1971)". _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  225. **^** _Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo_ , 418 U.S. 241 (1974)
  226. **^** Dennis Hevesi (February 2, 2010). "Dan Paul, 85, leading lawyer for press freedom". _The Boston Globe_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  227. **^** _Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Foundation_ , 438 U.S. 726 (1978)
  228. **^** _Grosjean v. American Press Co._ 297 U.S. 233 (1936)
  229. **^** Lewis 2007, p. 46.
  230. **^** _Arkansas Writers' Project v. Ragland_ , 481 U.S. 221 (1987)
  231. **^** _Leathers v. Medlock_ , 499 U.S. 439 (1991)
  232. **^** _Leathers_ , at 453
  233. **^** _Branzburg v. Hayes_ , 408 U.S. 665 (1972)
  234. **^** _Branzburg_ , 667
  235. **^** "Branzburg v. Hayes 408 U.S. 665 (1972)". _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  236. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ "Rights of Assembly  & Petition – First Amendment U.S. Constitution – Findlaw". findlaw.com. Retrieved October 5, 2012.
  237. **^** _California Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited_ , 404 U.S. 508 (1972). ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/6/62/PD-icon.svg/15px-PD-icon.svg.png) _This article incorporatespublic domain material from this U.S government document._
  238. **^** _California Motor Transport Co._ , 404 U.S. at 510.
  239. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Frequently Asked Questions – Petition". First Amendment Center. Archived from the original on April 19, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  240. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Eastern Railroad Presidents Conference v. Noerr Motor Freight, Inc._ , 365 U.S. 127 (1961)
  241. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri_ , 564 U.S. 379 (2011). ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/6/62/PD-icon.svg/15px-PD-icon.svg.png) _This article incorporatespublic domain material from this U.S government document._
  242. **^** _United States v. Cruikshank_ , 92 U.S. 542 (1875)
  243. **^** _Cruikshank_ , at 552
  244. **^** William Cooney (January 1, 2003). "Competition and the Noerr-Pennington doctrine: When should political activity be barred under European community competition law?". _The George Washington International Law Review_. Retrieved April 19, 2013 - via Questia Online Library.
  245. **^** _National Association for the Advancement of Colored People v. Alabama_ , 357 U.S. 449 (1958)
  246. **^** Wayne Batchis, Citizens United and the Paradox of "Corporate Speech": From Freedom of Association to Freedom of The Association, 36 N.Y.U. Rev. L.  & Soc. Change 5 Archived May 13, 2013, at the Wayback Machine (2012).
  247. **^** "National Association for the Advancement of Colored People v. Alabama 1958". _Supreme Court Drama: Cases That Changed America_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 13, 2013.
  248. **^** _Roberts v. United States Jaycees_ , 468 U.S. 609 (1984)
  249. **^** Shiffrin, Seana Valentine (January 1, 2005). "What is Really Wrong with Compelled Association?". _Northwestern University Law Review_. Retrieved April 13, 2013 - via Questia Online Library.
  250. **^** _Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston,_ 515 U.S. 557 (1995)
  251. **^** "Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, And Bisexual Group of Boston 515 U.S. 557 (1995)". _Encyclopedia of the American Constitution_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 13, 2013.
  252. **^** _Boy Scouts of America v. Dale_ , 530 U.S. 640 (2000)
  253. **^** "Boy Scouts of America v. Dale". _Gender Issues and Sexuality: Essential Primary Sources_. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). January 1, 2006. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved April 13, 2013.

**Bibliography**

  * Abrams, Floyd (April 4, 2006). _Speaking freely_. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-303675-3. Retrieved April 4, 2013.
  * Beeman, Richard (2009). _Plain, Honest Men: The Making of the American Constitution_. Random House. ISBN 978-1-58836-726-6. Retrieved April 4, 2013.
  * Jasper, Margaret C. (1999). _The Law of Speech and the First Amendment_. Oceana Publications. ISBN 978-0-379-11335-8. Retrieved April 4, 2013.
  * Nelson, William Edward (1994). _Americanization of the Common Law: The Impact of Legal Change on Massachusetts Society, 1760-1830_. University of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0-8203-1587-4. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  * Newell, Martin L. (1898). _The Law of Libel and Slander in Civil and Criminal Cases: As Administered in the Courts of the United States of America_. Callaghan. Retrieved April 19, 2013.
  * Lewis, Anthony (2007). _Freedom for the Thought That We Hate: A Biography of the First Amendment_. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-01819-2.

## Further reading

  * Curtis, Michael Kent (2000). _Free Speech, "The People’s Darling Privilege": Struggles for Freedom of Expression in American History_. Duke University Press. ISBN 0822325292.
  * Daniel L. Dreisbach and Mark David Hall. _The Sacred Rights of Conscience: Selected Readings on Religious Liberty and Church-State Relations in the American Founding._ Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund Press, 2009.
  * Daniel L. Dreisbach, Mark David Hall, and Jeffry Morrison. _The Forgotten Founders on Religion and Public Life_ Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2009.
  * Thomas I. Emerson, "Toward a General Theory of the First Amendment", _Yale Law Journal,_ vol. 72, no. 5 (1963), pp. 877–956. In JSTOR.
  * Godwin, Mike (2003). _Cyber Rights: Defending Free Speech in the Digital Age_. MIT Press. ISBN 0262571684.
  * P. Irons, _A People's History of the Supreme Court_ New York: Penguin, 1999.
  * McLeod, Kembrew (2007). _Freedom of Expression: Resistance and Repression in the Age of Intellectual Property_. foreword by Lawrence Lessig. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 0816650314.
  * Kabala, James S., _Church-State Relations in the Early American Republic, 1787-1846._ London: Pickering and Chatto, 2013.
  * J. Kilman and G. Costello (eds.), _The Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation._ (2000).
  * Lewis, Anthony (2007). _Freedom for the Thought That We Hate: A Biography of the First Amendment_. Basic Books. pp. 173–76. ISBN 978-0-465-03917-3. OCLC 173659591.
  * Nicholas P. Miller, _The Religious Roots of the First Amendment: Dissenting Protestants and the Separation of Church and State._ New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.
  * Nelson, Samuel P. (2005). _Beyond the First Amendment: The Politics of Free Speech and Pluralism_. The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0801881730.

## External links

**Listen to this article** (info/dl)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/47/Sound-icon.svg/45px-

Sound-icon.svg.png)

This audio file was created from a revision of the article "First Amendment to
the United States Constitution" dated 2006-06-30, and does not reflect
subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)

**More spoken articles**

**First Amendment to the United States Constitution** at Wikipedia's sister
projects

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/0/06/Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg/27px-Wiktionary-logo-v2.svg.png) Definitions from Wiktionary
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/20px-Commons-logo.svg.png)Media from Wikimedia Commons
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-logo.svg/23px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png)Quotations from Wikiquote
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/26px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png)Texts from Wikisource
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/ff/Wikidata-logo.svg/27px-Wikidata-logo.svg.png)Data from Wikidata

  * Cornell Law School – Annotated Constitution

  * First Amendment Center – The First Amendment Library at the Library of Congress Web Archives (archived 2004-10-16)
  * Cohen, Henry (October 16, 2009). "Freedom of Speech and Press: Exceptions to the First Amendment" (PDF). _Legislative Attorney_. Congressional Research Service. Retrieved January 1, 2012.

  * v

  * t
  * e

United States First Amendment case law

* * *

|

Establishment Clause

* * *

| Public funding|

  * _Everson v. Board of Education_ (1947)
  * _McCollum v. Board of Education_ (1948)
  * _Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York_ (1970)
  * _Lemon v. Kurtzman_ (1971)
  * _Marsh v. Chambers_ (1983)
  * _Mueller v. Allen_ (1983)
  * _Aguilar v. Felton_ (1985)
  * _Board of Education of Kiryas Joel Village School District v. Grumet_ (1994)
  * _Agostini v. Felton_ (1997)
  * _Mitchell v. Helms_ (2000)
  * _Zelman v. Simmons-Harris_ (2002)
  * _Locke v. Davey_ (2004)
  * _Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn_ (2011)

---|---  
Public displays|

  * _Stone v. Graham_ (1980)
  * _Lynch v. Donnelly_ (1984)
  * _Board of Trustees of Scarsdale v. McCreary_ (1985)
  * _County of Allegheny v. ACLU_ (1989)
  * _McCreary County v. ACLU of Kentucky_ (2005)
  * _Van Orden v. Perry_ (2005)
  * _Pleasant Grove City v. Summum_ (2009)
  * _The American Legion v. American Humanist Association_ (2019)

School prayer|

  * _Zorach v. Clauson_ (1952)
  * _Engel v. Vitale_ (1962)
  * _Abington School District v. Schempp_ (1963)
  * _Stone v. Graham_ (1980)
  * _Wallace v. Jaffree_ (1985)
  * _Lee v. Weisman_ (1992)
  * _Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe_ (2000)
  * _Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow_ (2004)

Creationism|

  * _Epperson v. Arkansas_ (1968)
  * _Edwards v. Aguillard_ (1987)
  * _Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District_ (M.D. Pa. 2005)

Legislature prayer|

  * _Marsh v. Chambers_ (1983)
  * _Town of Greece v. Galloway_ (2014)

Other|

  * _McGowan v. Maryland_ (1961)
  * _McDaniel v. Paty_ (1978)
  * _Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc._ (1985)
  * _Texas Monthly, Inc. v. Bullock_ (1989)
  * _Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church & School v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission_ (2012)

|

Free Exercise Clause

* * *

  * _Reynolds v. United States_ (1879)
  * _Davis v. Beason_ (1890)
  * _Schneider v. New Jersey_ (1939)
  * _Cantwell v. Connecticut_ (1940)
  * _Minersville School District v. Gobitis_ (1940)
  * _Murdock v. Pennsylvania_ (1943)
  * _United States v. Ballard_ (1944)
  * _Braunfeld v. Brown_ (1961)
  * _Torcaso v. Watkins_ (1961)
  * _Sherbert v. Verner_ (1963)
  * _Presbyterian Church v. Hull Church_ (1969)
  * _Wisconsin v. Yoder_ (1972)
  * _Harris v. McRae_ (1980)
  * _Thomas v. Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division_ (1981)
  * _United States v. Lee_ (1982)
  * _Bob Jones University v. United States_ (1983)
  * _Bowen v. Roy_ (1986)
  * _Goldman v. Weinberger_ (1986)
  * _Employment Division v. Smith_ (1990)
  * _Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah_ (1993)
  * _City of Boerne v. Flores_ (1997)
  * _Watchtower Society v. Village of Stratton_ (2002)
  * _Cutter v. Wilkinson_ (2005)
  * _Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer_ (2017)
  * _Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission_ (2018)
  * _National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra_ (2018)

|

Freedom of speech (portal)

* * *

| Sedition and  
imminent danger|

  * Alien and Sedition Acts (1798)
  * _Masses Publishing Co. v. Patten_ (S.D.N.Y. 1917)
  * _Schenck v. United States_ (1919)
  * _Abrams v. United States_ (1919)
  * _Gitlow v. New York_ (1925)
  * _Whitney v. California_ (1927)
  * _Dennis v. United States_ (1951)
  * _Communist Party v. Subversive Activities Control Board_ (1955, 1961)
  * _Yates v. United States_ (1957, clear and present danger)
  * _Bond v. Floyd_ (1966)
  * _Brandenburg v. Ohio_ (1969, imminent lawless action)
  * _Hess v. Indiana_ (1973)

---|---  
False speech|

  * _New York Times Co. v. Sullivan_ (1964, actual malice)
  * _United States v. Alvarez_ (2012)
  * _Susan B. Anthony List v. Driehaus_ (2014)

Fighting words and  
the heckler's veto|

  * _Cantwell v. Connecticut_ (1940)
  * _Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire_ (1942)
  * _Terminiello v. Chicago_ (1949)
  * _Feiner v. New York_ (1951)
  * _Gregory v. Chicago_ (1969)
  * _National Socialist Party of America v. Village of Skokie_ (1977)
  * _R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul_ (1992)
  * _Snyder v. Phelps_ (2011)
  * _Elonis v. United States_ (2015)

Freedom of assembly  
and public forums|

  * _Hague v. CIO_ (1939)
  * _Schneider v. New Jersey_ (1939)
  * _Thornhill v. Alabama_ (1940)
  * _Martin v. City of Struthers_ (1943)
  * _Marsh v. Alabama_ (1946)
  * _Niemotko v. Maryland_ (1951)
  * _Edwards v. South Carolina_ (1963)
  * _Cox v. Louisiana_ (1965)
  * _Brown v. Louisiana_ (1966)
  * _Adderley v. Florida_ (1966)
  * _Carroll v. Town of Princess Anne_ (1968)
  * _Coates v. Cincinnati_ (1971)
  * _Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe_ (1971)
  * _Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner_ (1972)
  * _Pruneyard Shopping Center v. Robins_ (1980)
  * _Hill v. Colorado_ (2000)
  * _McCullen v. Coakley_ (2014)
  * _Packingham v. North Carolina_ (2017)

Symbolic speech|

  * _Stromberg v. California_ (1931)
  * _United States v. O'Brien_ (1968)
  * _Cohen v. California_ (1971)
  * _Smith v. Goguen_ (1974)
  * _Texas v. Johnson_ (1989)
  * _United States v. Eichman_ (1990)
  * _Virginia v. Black_ (2003)

Compelled speech|

  * _Minersville School District v. Gobitis_ (1940)
  * _West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette_ (1943)
  * _Wooley v. Maynard_ (1977)
  * _Agency for International Development v. Alliance for Open Society International, Inc._ (2013)
  * _National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra_ (2018)

Compelled subsidy  
of others' speech|

  * _Abood v. Detroit Board of Education_ (1977)
  * _Communications Workers of America v. Beck_ (1978)
  * _Keller v. State Bar of California_ (1990)
  * _Lehnert v. Ferris Faculty Ass'n_ (1991)
  * _Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System v. Southworth_ (2000)
  * _Johanns v. Livestock Marketing Association_ (2005)
  * _Davenport v. Washington Education Association_ (2007)
  * _Locke v. Karass_ (2008)
  * _Knox v. Service Employees International Union, Local 1000_ (2012)
  * _Harris v. Quinn_ (2014)
  * _Friedrichs v. California Teachers Ass'n_ (2016)
  * _Janus v. AFSCME_ (2018)

Loyalty oaths|

  * _American Communications Association v. Douds_ (1950)
  * _Garner v. Board of Public Works_ (1951)
  * _Speiser v. Randall_ (1958)
  * _Keyishian v. Board of Regents_ (1967)
  * _Communist Party of Indiana v. Whitcomb_ (1974)

School speech|

  * _Minersville School District v. Gobitis_ (1940)
  * _West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette_ (1943)
  * _Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District_ (1969, substantial disruption)
  * _Island Trees School District v. Pico_ (1982)
  * _Bethel School District v. Fraser_ (1986)
  * _Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier_ (1988)
  * _Rosenberger v. University of Virginia_ (1995)
  * _Morse v. Frederick_ (2007)

Obscenity|

  * _Rosen v. United States_ (1896)
  * _United States v. One Book Called Ulysses_ (S.D.N.Y. 1933)
  * _Roth v. United States_ (1957)
  * _One, Inc. v. Olesen_ (1958)
  * _Smith v. California_ (1959)
  * _Marcus v. Search Warrant_ (1961)
  * _MANual Enterprises v. Day_ (1962)
  * _Jacobellis v. Ohio_ (1964)
  * _Quantity of Books v. Kansas_ (1964)
  * _Freedman v. Maryland_ (1965)
  * _Ginzburg v. United States_ (1966)
  * _Memoirs v. Massachusetts_ (1966)
  * _Redrup v. New York_ (1967)
  * _Ginsberg v. New York_ (1968)
  * _Stanley v. Georgia_ (1969)
  * _Cohen v. California_ (1971)
  * _United States v. Thirty-seven Photographs_ (1971)
  * _Kois v. Wisconsin_ (1972)
  * _Miller v. California_ (1973)
  * _Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton_ (1973)
  * _United States v. 12 200-ft. Reels of Film_ (1973)
  * _Jenkins v. Georgia_ (1974)
  * _Erznoznik v. City of Jacksonville_ (1975)
  * _Young v. American Mini Theatres_ (1976)
  * _New York v. Ferber_ (1982)
  * _American Booksellers v. Hudnut_ (7th Cir., 1985)
  * _Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc._ (1986)
  * _People v. Freeman_ (Cal. 1988)
  * _Osborne v. Ohio_ (1990)
  * _United States v. X-Citement Video, Inc._ (1994)
  * _Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union_ (1997)
  * _United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group_ (2000)
  * _Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition_ (2002)
  * _Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union_ (2002)
  * _Nitke v. Gonzales_ (S.D.N.Y., 2005)
  * _United States v. Williams_ (2008)
  * _American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression v. Strickland_ (6th Cir., 2009)
  * _United States v. Kilbride_ (9th Cir., 2009)
  * _United States v. Stevens_ (2010)
  * _Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association_ (2011)
  * _Federal Communications Commission v. Fox Television Stations_ (2012)

Public employees|

  * _Pickering v. Board of Education_ (1968)
  * _Perry v. Sindermann_ (1972)
  * _Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth_ (1972)
  * _Mt. Healthy City School District Board of Education v. Doyle_ (1977)
  * _Givhan v. Western Line Consolidated School District_ (1979)
  * _Connick v. Myers_ (1983)
  * _Rankin v. McPherson_ (1987)
  * _Waters v. Churchill_ (1994)
  * _Garcetti v. Ceballos_ (2006)
  * _Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri_ (2011)
  * _Heffernan v. City of Paterson_ (2016)

Hatch Act  
and similar laws|

  * _Ex parte Curtis_ (1882)
  * _United Public Workers v. Mitchell_ (1947)
  * _United States Civil Service Commission v. National Association of Letter Carriers_ (1973)
  * _Broadrick v. Oklahoma_ (1973)

Licensing and  
restriction of speech|

  * _Mutual Film Corporation v. Industrial Commission of Ohio_ (1915)
  * _Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson_ (1952)
  * _NAACP v. Button_ (1963)
  * _Freedman v. Maryland_ (1965)
  * _Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council_ (1976)
  * _Hoffman Estates v. The Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc._ (1982)
  * _Walker v. Texas Division, Sons of Confederate Veterans_ (2015)
  * _Matal v. Tam_ (2017)

Commercial speech|

  * _Valentine v. Chrestensen_ (1942)
  * _Rowan v. U.S. Post Office Dept._ (1970)
  * _Pittsburgh Press Co. v. Pittsburgh Commission on Human Relations_ (1973)
  * _Bigelow v. Commonwealth of Virginia_ (1974)
  * _Virginia State Pharmacy Board v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council_ (1976)
  * _Bates v. State Bar of Arizona_ (1977)
  * _Linmark Associates, Inc. v. Willingboro_ (1977)
  * _Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission_ (1980)
  * _Consol. Edison Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n_ (1980)
  * _Zauderer v. Office of Disciplinary Counsel of Supreme Court of Ohio_ (1985)
  * _Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. Public Utilities Commission of California_ (1986)
  * _Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v. Tourism Company of Puerto Rico_ (1986)
  * _San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Committee_ (1987)
  * _44 Liquormart, Inc. v. Rhode Island_ (1996)
  * _Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc._ (2011)

Campaign finance and  
political speech|

  * _Buckley v. Valeo_ (1976)
  * _First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti_ (1978)
  * _Citizens Against Rent Control v. City of Berkeley_ (1981)
  * _Brown v. Socialist Workers '74 Campaign Committee_ (1982)
  * _Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington_ (1983)
  * _FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life_ (1986)
  * _Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce_ (1990)
  * _McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission_ (1995)
  * _Colorado Republican Federal Campaign Committee v. FEC_ (1996)
  * _Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC_ (2000)
  * _Republican Party of Minnesota v. White_ (2002)
  * _McConnell v. FEC_ (2003)
  * _Randall v. Sorrell_ (2006)
  * _FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc._ (2007)
  * _Davis v. FEC_ (2008)
  * _Citizens United v. FEC_ (2010)
  * _McComish v. Bennett_ (2011)
  * _American Tradition Partnership v. Bullock_ (2012)
  * _McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission_ (2014)
  * _Williams-Yulee v. Florida Bar_ (2015)

Official retaliation|

  * _Lozman v. City of Riviera Beach_ (2018)
  * _Nieves v. Bartlett_ (2019)

|

Freedom of the press

* * *

| Prior restraints  
and censorship|

  * _Near v. Minnesota_ (1931)
  * _Lovell v. City of Griffin_ (1938)
  * _Hannegan v. Esquire, Inc._ (1946)
  * _New York Times Co. v. United States_ (1971)
  * _Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo_ (1974)
  * _Nebraska Press Ass'n v. Stuart_ (1976)
  * _Landmark Communications, Inc. v. Virginia_ (1978)
  * _Tory v. Cochran_ (2005)

---|---  
Privacy|

  * _Time, Inc. v. Hill_ (1967)
  * _Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn_ (1975)
  * _Florida Star v. B. J. F._ (1989)

Taxation and  
privileges|

  * _Grosjean v. American Press Co._ (1936)
  * _Branzburg v. Hayes_ (1972)
  * _Minneapolis Star Tribune Co. v. Commissioner_ (1983)

Defamation|

  * _Beauharnais v. Illinois_ (1952)
  * _New York Times Co. v. Sullivan_ (1964)
  * _Curtis Publishing Co. v. Butts_ (1967)
  * _Greenbelt Cooperative Publishing Ass'n, Inc. v. Bresler_ (1970)
  * _Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc._ (1974)
  * _Time, Inc. v. Firestone_ (1976)
  * _Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United States, Inc._ (1984)
  * _Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc._ (1985)
  * _McDonald v. Smith_ (1985)
  * _Hustler Magazine v. Falwell_ (1988)
  * _Harte-Hanks Communications, Inc. v. Connaughton_ (1989)
  * _Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co._ (1990)
  * _Obsidian Finance Group, LLC v. Cox_ (9th Cir., 2014)

Broadcast media|

  * _Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC_ (1969)
  * _FCC v. Pacifica Foundation_ (1978)
  * _Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC_ (1994)
  * _Bartnicki v. Vopper_ (2001)

Copyrighted materials|

  * _Zacchini v. Scripps-Howard Broadcasting Co._ (1977)
  * _Harper & Row v. Nation Enterprises_ (1985)

|

Freedom of association

* * *

  * _Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath_ (1951)
  * _Watkins v. United States_ (1957)
  * _NAACP v. Alabama_ (1958)
  * _NAACP v. Button_ (1963)
  * _Baggett v. Bullitt_ (1964)
  * _In re Primus_ (1978)
  * _Roberts v. United States Jaycees_ (1984)
  * _Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston_ (1995)
  * _Boy Scouts of America v. Dale_ (2000)

  * v

  * t
  * e

Constitution of the United States

* * *

Articles|

  * Preamble
  * I
  * II
  * III
  * IV
  * V
  * VI
  * VII

Amendments|

| Ratified|

| Bill of Rights|

  * 1
  * 2
  * 3
  * 4
  * 5
  * 6
  * 7
  * 8
  * 9
  * 10

---|---  
1795 - 1804|

  * 11
  * 12

Reconstruction|

  * 13
  * 14
  * 15

Twentieth century|

  * 16
  * 17
  * 18
  * 19
  * 20
  * 21
  * 22
  * 23
  * 24
  * 25
  * 26
  * 27

Pending|

  * Congressional Apportionment
  * Titles of Nobility
  * Corwin Amendment
  * Child Labor

Unsuccessful|

  * Equal Rights
  * District of Columbia Voting Rights

  * Amendment proposals in Congress

  * Convention to propose amendments
  * State ratifying conventions

Formation|

  * History
  * Articles of Confederation
  * Mount Vernon Conference
  * Annapolis Convention
  * Philadelphia Convention
    * Virginia Plan
    * New Jersey Plan
    * Connecticut Compromise
    * Three-Fifths Compromise
    * Committee of Detail
    * Signing
    * Independence Hall
    * Syng inkstand
  * _The Federalist Papers_
  * Anti-Federalist Papers
  * Massachusetts Compromise
  * Virginia Ratifying Convention
  * Hillsborough Convention
  * Rhode Island ratification
  * Drafting and ratification timeline

Clauses|

  * Appointments
  * Appropriations
  * Assistance of Counsel
  * Case or Controversy
  * Citizenship
  * Commerce
  * Compact
  * Compulsory Process
  * Confrontation
  * Congressional enforcement
  * Contract
  * Copyright and Patent
  * Double Jeopardy
  * Due Process
  * Elections
  * Equal Protection
  * Establishment
  * Exceptions
  * Excessive Bail
  * _Ex post facto_
  * Extradition
  * Free Exercise
  * Free Speech
  * Fugitive Slave
  * Full Faith and Credit
  * General Welfare
  * Guarantee
  * Impeachment
  * Import-Export
  * Ineligibility
  * Militia
  * Natural-born citizen
  * Necessary and Proper
  * New States
  * No Religious Test
  * Oath or Affirmation
  * Origination
  * Pardon
  * Petition
  * Postal
  * Presentment
  * Presidential succession
  * Privileges and Immunities
  * Privileges or Immunities
  * Recess appointment
  * Recommendation
  * Self-Incrimination
  * Speech or Debate
  * Speedy Trial
  * State of the Union
  * Supremacy
  * Suspension
  * Take Care
  * Takings
  * Taxing and Spending
  * Territorial
  * Title of Nobility
  * Treaty
  * Trial by Jury
  * Vesting
  * Vicinage
  * War Powers
  * List of clauses

Interpretation|

  * Concurrent powers
  * Constitutional law
  * Criminal procedure
  * Criminal sentencing
  * Dormant Commerce Clause
  * Enumerated powers
  * Equal footing
  * Executive privilege
  * Incorporation of the Bill of Rights
  * Judicial review
  * Nondelegation doctrine
  * Preemption
  * Saxbe fix
  * Separation of church and state
  * Separation of powers
  * Taxation power
  * Unitary executive theory

Display  
and legacy|

  * National Archives
    * Charters of Freedom Rotunda
  * Independence Mall
  * Constitution Day
  * Constitution Gardens
  * National Constitution Center
  * _Scene at the Signing of the Constitution_ (painting)
  * _A More Perfect Union_ (film)
  * USS _Constitution_
  * Worldwide influence

**US Government Portal** • **Law Portal** • **Wikipedia book**

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

  * GND: 4443922-2
  * LCCN: n81096440
  * VIAF: 179830264
  * WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 179830264

---|--- 

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=First_Amendment_to_the_United_States_Constitution&oldid=900663930"

Categories:

  * Spoken articles
  * 1791 in American politics
  * 1791 in American law
  * Amendments to the United States Constitution
  * Christianity and law in the 18th century
  * First Amendment to the United States Constitution
  * Freedom of religion in the United States
  * Separation of church and state in the United States

Hidden categories:

  * CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty
  * Subscription required using via
  * Pages containing links to subscription-only content
  * Wikipedia articles incorporating text from public domain works of the United States Government
  * CS1: long volume value
  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * Use American English from January 2019
  * All Wikipedia articles written in American English
  * Articles with short description
  * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
  * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
  * Good articles
  * Use mdy dates from April 2013
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015
  * Articles with hAudio microformats
  * Webarchive template other archives
  * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * View source
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikiquote

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Ænglisc
  * العربية
  * Беларуская
  * Български
  * Català
  * Deutsch
  * Español
  * Esperanto
  * فارسی
  * Français
  * 한국어
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Íslenska
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * 日本語
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Русский
  * Simple English
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Українська
  * Tiếng Việt
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 6 June 2019, at 23:09 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

