  
  
![MailOnline - news, sport, celebrity, science and health

stories](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/sitelogos/logo_mol.gif)![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

        
                  * Home
          * News
          * U.S.
          * Sport
          * TV&Showbiz
          * Australia
          * Femail
          * Health
          *     Science
          * Money
          * Video
          * Travel
          * DailyMailTV
        
          * Latest Headlines
          * Science
          * Discounts
          * My Profile
          * Logout
          * Login
        

![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/furniture/facebook/DailyMail/DailyMail.png)

**Friday, Jun 7th 2019** 12PM **19 °C** 3PM **19 °C** 5-Day Forecast

Advertisement

****show ad

## Exposed: How world leaders were duped into investing billions over

manipulated global warming data

        
                  *  **The Mail on Sunday can reveal a landmark paper exaggerated global warming**
          *  **It was rushed through and timed to influence the Paris agreement on climate change**
          *  **America's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration broke its own rules**
          *  **The report claimed the pause in global warming never existed, but it was based on misleading, 'unverified' data**
        

By David Rose for The Mail on Sunday

Published: 22:57 BST, 4 February 2017 | Updated: 00:28 BST, 17 September 2017

        
                  *       *       *       *       *       * e-mail
          * **186k** shares
        

2k

View  
comments

The Independent Press Standards Organisation has upheld a complaint against
this article. IPSO's adjudication is as follows:

Following an article published on 5 February 2017 in the Mail on Sunday,
headlined 'EXPOSED How world leaders were duped over global warming', Bob Ward
complained to the Independent Press Standards Organisation that the newspaper
had breached Clause 1 (Accuracy) of the Editors' Code of Practice. IPSO upheld
the complaint and has required the Mail on Sunday to publish this decision as
a remedy to the breach.

The article reported on claims made by Dr John Bates, a climate scientist
formerly employed at the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), about a paper published in the journal Science that suggested that
there had been no 'pause' in global warming in the 2000s. Dr Bates had
published a blog criticising the way the data used for the paper had been
analysed and archived. The article detailed at length the complainant's
concerns with the data; it then characterised them as demonstrating
'irrefutable evidence' that the paper had been based upon 'misleading,
unverified data'.

The article was illustrated with a graph. It plotted a red line, described as
'the 'adjusted' and unreliable sea data cited in the flawed 'Pausebuster'
paper', and a blue line, described as 'the UK Met Office's independently
verified record', which it said 'showed lower monthly readings and a shallower
recent warming trend'. A note at the base of the graph stated that '0
represents 14°C'.

The complainant said that the significance of Dr Bates' concerns about the
archiving procedures had been misrepresented in the article, and the newspaper
had taken no steps to establish the veracity of Dr Bates' claims. World
leaders had not been 'duped', as the headline said, and there was no
'irrefutable evidence' that the paper was based on 'misleading, unverified
data', as the article had claimed.

The newspaper said that Dr Bates had shown it examples of both fully archived
climate data and the less detailed version used for the paper; putting raw
data on a website is not the same thing as full data archiving; therefore the
evidence that the paper's data was unverified and misleading, was
'irrefutable'.

The Committee emphasised that its central concern was whether the article had
accurately reported Dr Bates' concerns. It decided that the newspaper's claims
that Dr Bates' testimony had provided 'irrefutable evidence' that the paper
had been based on 'misleading, 'unverified' data', leading – as the headline
claimed – to world leaders being 'duped' over global warming, and 'convinced'
to invest billions in climate change, went much further than the concerns
which Dr Bates had detailed in his blog or in the interview; they did not
represent criticisms of the data collection process, but rather, were
assertions of fact that the data had been demonstrated conclusively to be
wrong and had a significant impact on the decision making of world leaders,
with an additional implication this had been part of a wilful attempt to
deceive.

The article claimed that because of the NOAA's 'failure to 'archive' the data,
'its results can never be verified'. The Committee did not consider that the
article had made sufficiently clear that the failure to archive, had been a
failure to archive the data through a particular method, and that the data had
been made publicly available. In characterising Dr Bates' claims in this way
the newspaper had failed to take care over the accuracy of the article, in
breach of Clause 1 (i) and had then failed to correct these significantly
misleading statements, in breach of Clause 1 (ii).

The graph which accompanied the article had provided a visual illustration of
the newspaper's contention regarding the difference between the 'flawed' NOAA
data and other, 'verified', data. The newspaper's failure to plot the lines
correctly represented a breach of Clause 1 (i), and there had been a further
failure to correct the significantly misleading impression created as a
result. There was a further breach of Clause 1 on this point.

![Data Science,Climate and satellites Consultant John J Bates, who blew the

whistle to the Mail on

Sunday](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![Data Science,Climate and satellites Consultant John J Bates, who blew the

whistle to the Mail on

Sunday](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/22/3CD7498B00000578-4192182-image-a-60_1486248052731.jpg)

Data Science,Climate and satellites Consultant John J Bates, who blew the
whistle to the Mail on Sunday

The Mail on Sunday today reveals astonishing evidence that the organisation
that is the world's leading source of climate data rushed to publish a
landmark paper that exaggerated global warming and was timed to influence the
historic Paris Agreement on climate change.

A high-level whistleblower has told this newspaper that America's National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) breached its own rules on
scientific integrity when it published the sensational but flawed report,
aimed at making the maximum possible impact on world leaders including Barack
Obama and David Cameron at the UN climate conference in Paris in 2015.

The report claimed that the 'pause' or 'slowdown' in global warming in the
period since 1998 – revealed by UN scientists in 2013 – never existed, and
that world temperatures had been rising faster than scientists expected.
Launched by NOAA with a public relations fanfare, it was splashed across the
world's media, and cited repeatedly by politicians and policy makers.

But the whistleblower, Dr John Bates, a top NOAA scientist with an impeccable
reputation, has shown The Mail on Sunday irrefutable evidence that the paper
was based on misleading, 'unverified' data.

It was never subjected to NOAA's rigorous internal evaluation process – which
Dr Bates devised.

His vehement objections to the publication of the faulty data were overridden
by his NOAA superiors in what he describes as a 'blatant attempt to intensify
the impact' of what became known as the Pausebuster paper.

His disclosures are likely to stiffen President Trump's determination to enact
his pledges to reverse his predecessor's 'green' policies, and to withdraw
from the Paris deal – so triggering an intense political row.

## RELATED ARTICLES

        
                  * Previous
          * 1
          * Next
        
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/03/16/3CCDA78E00000578-0-image-m-47_1486139286010.jpg) The three theories of the APOCALYPSE: Researchers say... ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/01/28/22/3C60A1E200000578-0-image-m-40_1485640808219.jpg) Trump's snub for the Green Prince: US President 'will avoid... ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/01/28/10/3C78095E00000578-0-image-m-38_1485599466030.jpg) Prince Charles dismayed the public has become overly... ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/01/22/00/3C60A1E200000578-0-image-m-31_1485044274309.jpg) EXCLUSIVE: 'We must act before it is too late and we test...
        

## Share this article

Share

186k shares

![Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, Microsoft CEO Bill Gates, US

President Barack Obama, French President Francois Hollande and Indian Prime

Minister Narendra Modi at the world climate change

conference](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, Microsoft CEO Bill Gates, US

President Barack Obama, French President Francois Hollande and Indian Prime

Minister Narendra Modi at the world climate change

conference](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/22/3CD7498F00000578-4192182-image-m-62_1486248085744.jpg)

Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, Microsoft CEO Bill Gates, US President
Barack Obama, French President Francois Hollande and Indian Prime Minister
Narendra Modi at the world climate change conference

![The PM, the Prince and 'the pause': David Cameron and Prince Charles

attended the historic 2015 Paris climate change conference with 150 world

leaders. Cameron committed Britain to an EU-Wide emission cut as a result. And

Charles, writing in this paper last month, stated there was no pause in global

warming, influenced by the flawed NOAA paper that made this

claim](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![The PM, the Prince and 'the pause': David Cameron and Prince Charles

attended the historic 2015 Paris climate change conference with 150 world

leaders. Cameron committed Britain to an EU-Wide emission cut as a result. And

Charles, writing in this paper last month, stated there was no pause in global

warming, influenced by the flawed NOAA paper that made this

claim](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/22/3CD7498500000578-4192182-image-a-63_1486248157838.jpg)

The PM, the Prince and 'the pause': David Cameron and Prince Charles attended
the historic 2015 Paris climate change conference with 150 world leaders.
Cameron committed Britain to an EU-Wide emission cut as a result. And Charles,
writing in this paper last month, stated there was no pause in global warming,
influenced by the flawed NOAA paper that made this claim

In an exclusive interview, Dr Bates accused the lead author of the paper,
Thomas Karl, who was until last year director of the NOAA section that
produces climate data – the National Centers for Environmental Information
(NCEI) – of 'insisting on decisions and scientific choices that maximised
warming and minimised documentation… in an effort to discredit the notion of a
global warming pause, rushed so that he could time publication to influence
national and international deliberations on climate policy'.

Dr Bates was one of two Principal Scientists at NCEI, based in Asheville,
North Carolina.

A blatant attempt to intensify paper's impact

Official delegations from America, Britain and the EU were strongly influenced
by the flawed NOAA study as they hammered out the Paris Agreement – and
committed advanced nations to sweeping reductions in their use of fossil fuel
and to spending £80 billion every year on new, climate-related aid projects.

The scandal has disturbing echoes of the 'Climategate' affair which broke
shortly before the UN climate summit in 2009, when the leak of thousands of
emails between climate scientists suggested they had manipulated and hidden
data. Some were British experts at the influential Climatic Research Unit at
the University of East Anglia.

### LED TO THESE GREEN COMMITMENTS

Data published by NOAA, the world's top climate data agency, claimed global
warming was worse than previously thought. The information was published to
coincide with the Paris climate change conference in 2015, where world leaders
agreed that...

$100bn be given every year in extra 'climate-related' aid to the developing
world by rich nations

2 degrees C be set as the limit for maximum temperature rise above pre-
industrial times

40% of CO2 emissions would be cut across the EU by 2030

£320bn… what the UK's pledges will cost our economy by 2030

NOAA's 2015 'Pausebuster' paper was based on two new temperature sets of data
– one containing measurements of temperatures at the planet's surface on land,
the other at the surface of the seas.

Both datasets were flawed. This newspaper has learnt that NOAA has now decided
that the sea dataset will have to be replaced and substantially revised just
18 months after it was issued, because it used unreliable methods which
overstated the speed of warming. The revised data will show both lower
temperatures and a slower rate in the recent warming trend.

The land temperature dataset used by the study was afflicted by devastating
bugs in its software that rendered its findings 'unstable'.

The paper relied on a preliminary, 'alpha' version of the data which was never
approved or verified.

A final, approved version has still not been issued. None of the data on which
the paper was based was properly 'archived' – a mandatory requirement meant to
ensure that raw data and the software used to process it is accessible to
other scientists, so they can verify NOAA results.

Dr Bates retired from NOAA at the end of last year after a 40-year career in
meteorology and climate science. As recently as 2014, the Obama administration
awarded him a special gold medal for his work in setting new, supposedly
binding standards 'to produce and preserve climate data records'.

Yet when it came to the paper timed to influence the Paris conference, Dr
Bates said, these standards were flagrantly ignored.

The paper was published in June 2015 by the journal Science. Entitled
'Possible artifacts of data biases in the recent global surface warming
hiatus', the document said the widely reported 'pause' or 'slowdown' was a
myth.

Less than two years earlier, a blockbuster report from the UN
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which drew on the work of
hundreds of scientists around the world, had found 'a much smaller increasing
trend over the past 15 years 1998-2012 than over the past 30 to 60 years'.
Explaining the pause became a key issue for climate science. It was seized on
by global warming sceptics, because the level of CO2 in the atmosphere had
continued to rise.

### WHY OBAMA'S GREEN GURU WILL MAKE TRUMP SEE RED

NOAA's climate boss Thomas Karl, below left, had a hotline to the White House,
through his long association with President Obama's science adviser, John
Holdren.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/22/3CD7455900000578-4192182-image-m-67_1486248420399.jpg)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/22/3CD7456500000578-4192182-image-a-68_1486248433057.jpg)

Karl's 'Pausebuster' paper was hugely influential in dictating the world
agreement in Paris and sweeping US emissions cuts. President Trump, above
right, has pledged to scrap both policies – triggering furious claims by
Democrats he is a climate 'denier' and 'anti-science'.

Thanks to today's MoS story, NOAA is set to face an inquiry by the Republican-
led House science committee.

Some scientists argued that the existence of the pause meant the world's
climate is less sensitive to greenhouse gases than previously thought, so that
future warming would be slower. One of them, Professor Judith Curry, then head
of climate science at the Georgia Institute of Technology, said it suggested
that computer models used to project future warming were 'running too hot'.

However, the Pausebuster paper said while the rate of global warming from 1950
to 1999 was 0.113C per decade, the rate from 2000 to 2014 was actually higher,
at 0.116C per decade. The IPCC's claim about the pause, it concluded, 'was no
longer valid'.

The impact was huge and lasting. On publication day, the BBC said the pause in
global warming was 'an illusion caused by inaccurate data'.

One American magazine described the paper as a 'science bomb' dropped on
sceptics.

Its impact could be seen in this newspaper last month when, writing to launch
his Ladybird book about climate change, Prince Charles stated baldly: 'There
isn't a pause… it is hard to reject the facts on the basis of the evidence.'

Data changed to make the sea appear warmer

The sea dataset used by Thomas Karl and his colleagues – known as Extended
Reconstructed Sea Surface Temperatures version 4, or ERSSTv4, tripled the
warming trend over the sea during the years 2000 to 2014 from just 0.036C per
decade – as stated in version 3 – to 0.099C per decade. Individual
measurements in some parts of the globe had increased by about 0.1C and this
resulted in the dramatic increase of the overall global trend published by the
Pausebuster paper. But Dr Bates said this increase in temperatures was
achieved by dubious means. Its key error was an upwards 'adjustment' of
readings from fixed and floating buoys, which are generally reliable, to bring
them into line with readings from a much more doubtful source – water taken in
by ships. This, Dr Bates explained, has long been known to be questionable:
ships are themselves sources of heat, readings will vary from ship to ship,
and the depth of water intake will vary according to how heavily a ship is
laden – so affecting temperature readings.

Dr Bates said: 'They had good data from buoys. And they threw it out and
'corrected' it by using the bad data from ships. You never change good data to
agree with bad, but that's what they did – so as to make it look as if the sea
was warmer.'

ERSSTv4 'adjusted' buoy readings up by 0.12C. It also ignored data from
satellites that measure the temperature of the lower atmosphere, which are
also considered reliable. Dr Bates said he gave the paper's co-authors 'a hard
time' about this, 'and they never really justified what they were doing.'

Now, some of those same authors have produced the pending, revised new version
of the sea dataset – ERSSTv5. A draft of a document that explains the methods
used to generate version 5, and which has been seen by this newspaper,
indicates the new version will reverse the flaws in version 4, changing the
buoy adjustments and including some satellite data and measurements from a
special high-tech floating buoy network known as Argo. As a result, it is
certain to show reductions in both absolute temperatures and recent global
warming.

The second dataset used by the Pausebuster paper was a new version of NOAA's
land records, known as the Global Historical Climatology Network (GHCN), an
analysis over time of temperature readings from about 4,000 weather stations
spread across the globe.

![The unstable land readings: Scientists at NOAA used land temperature data

from 4,000 weather stations \(pictured, one in Montana, USA\). But the

software used to process the figures was bug-ridden and unstable. NOAA also

used 'unverified' data that was not tested or approved. This data as merged

with unreliable sea surface

temperatures](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![The unstable land readings: Scientists at NOAA used land temperature data

from 4,000 weather stations \(pictured, one in Montana, USA\). But the

software used to process the figures was bug-ridden and unstable. NOAA also

used 'unverified' data that was not tested or approved. This data as merged

with unreliable sea surface

temperatures](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/22/3CD7497B00000578-4192182-image-a-89_1486249193694.jpg)

The unstable land readings: Scientists at NOAA used land temperature data from
4,000 weather stations (pictured, one in Montana, USA). But the software used
to process the figures was bug-ridden and unstable. NOAA also used
'unverified' data that was not tested or approved. This data as merged with
unreliable sea surface temperatures

![The 'adjusted' sea readings: Average sea surface temperatures are calculated

using data from weather buoys \(pictured\). But NOAA ¿adjusted¿ these figures

upwards to fit with data taken from ships ¿ which is notoriously unreliable.

This exaggerated the warming rate, allowing NOAA to claim in the paper dubbed

the ¿Pausebuster¿ that there was no

¿pause¿](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![The 'adjusted' sea readings: Average sea surface temperatures are calculated

using data from weather buoys \(pictured\). But NOAA ¿adjusted¿ these figures

upwards to fit with data taken from ships ¿ which is notoriously unreliable.

This exaggerated the warming rate, allowing NOAA to claim in the paper dubbed

the ¿Pausebuster¿ that there was no

¿pause¿](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/23/3CD7DC8200000578-4192182-image-a-99_1486251153059.jpg)

The 'adjusted' sea readings: Average sea surface temperatures are calculated
using data from weather buoys (pictured). But NOAA 'adjusted' these figures
upwards to fit with data taken from ships – which is notoriously unreliable.
This exaggerated the warming rate, allowing NOAA to claim in the paper dubbed
the 'Pausebuster' that there was no 'pause'

This new version found past temperatures had been cooler than previously
thought, and recent ones higher – so that the warming trend looked steeper.
For the period 2000 to 2014, the paper increased the rate of warming on land
from 0.15C to 0.164C per decade.

In the weeks after the Pausebuster paper was published, Dr Bates conducted a
one-man investigation into this. His findings were extraordinary. Not only had
Mr Karl and his colleagues failed to follow any of the formal procedures
required to approve and archive their data, they had used a 'highly
experimental early run' of a programme that tried to combine two previously
separate sets of records.

This had undergone the critical process known as 'pairwise homogeneity
adjustment', a method of spotting 'rogue' readings from individual weather
stations by comparing them with others nearby.

However, this process requires extensive, careful checking which was only just
beginning, so that the data was not ready for operational use. Now, more than
two years after the Pausebuster paper was submitted to Science, the new
version of GHCN is still undergoing testing.

Moreover, the GHCN software was afflicted by serious bugs. They caused it to
become so 'unstable' that every time the raw temperature readings were run
through the computer, it gave different results. The new, bug-free version of
GHCN has still not been approved and issued. It is, Dr Bates said,
'significantly different' from that used by Mr Karl and his co-authors.

Dr Bates revealed that the failure to archive and make available fully
documented data not only violated NOAA rules, but also those set down by
Science. Before he retired last year, he continued to raise the issue
internally. Then came the final bombshell. Dr Bates said: 'I learned that the
computer used to process the software had suffered a complete failure.'

The reason for the failure is unknown, but it means the Pausebuster paper can
never be replicated or verified by other scientists.

The flawed conclusions of the Pausebuster paper were widely discussed by
delegates at the Paris climate change conference. Mr Karl had a longstanding
relationship with President Obama's chief science adviser, John Holdren,
giving him a hotline to the White House.

![They were forced to correct it: 18 months after the ¿Pausebuster¿ paper was

published in time for the 2015 Paris climate change conference, NOAA¿s flawed

sea temperature dataset is to be replaced. The new version will remedy its

failings, and use data from both buoys and satellites \(pictured\) ¿ which

some say is the best data of all. The new version will show both lower

temperatures and a lower warming trend since

2000](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![They were forced to correct it: 18 months after the ¿Pausebuster¿ paper was

published in time for the 2015 Paris climate change conference, NOAA¿s flawed

sea temperature dataset is to be replaced. The new version will remedy its

failings, and use data from both buoys and satellites \(pictured\) ¿ which

some say is the best data of all. The new version will show both lower

temperatures and a lower warming trend since

2000](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/23/3CD7499300000578-4192182-image-a-98_1486249722399.jpg)

They were forced to correct it: 18 months after the 'Pausebuster' paper was
published in time for the 2015 Paris climate change conference, NOAA's flawed
sea temperature dataset is to be replaced. The new version will remedy its
failings, and use data from both buoys and satellites (pictured) – which some
say is the best data of all. The new version will show both lower temperatures
and a lower warming trend since 2000

Mr Holdren was also a strong advocate of robust measures to curb emissions.
Britain's then Prime Minister David Cameron claimed at the conference that '97
per cent of scientists say climate change is urgent and man-made and must be
addressed' and called for 'a binding legal mechanism' to ensure the world got
no more than 2C warmer than in pre-industrial times.

President Obama stressed his Clean Power Plan at the conference, which
mandates American power stations to make big emissions cuts.

President Trump has since pledged he will scrap it, and to withdraw from the
Paris Agreement.

Whatever takes its place, said Dr Bates, 'there needs to be a fundamental
change to the way NOAA deals with data so that people can check and validate
scientific results. I'm hoping that this will be a wake-up call to the climate
science community – a signal that we have to put in place processes to make
sure this kind of crap doesn't happen again.

'I want to address the systemic problems. I don't care whether modifications
to the datasets make temperatures go up or down. But I want the observations
to speak for themselves, and for that, there needs to be a new emphasis that
ethical standards must be maintained.'

He said he decided to speak out after seeing reports in papers including the
Washington Post and Forbes magazine claiming that scientists feared the Trump
administration would fail to maintain and preserve NOAA's climate records.

Dr Bates said: 'How ironic it is that there is now this idea that Trump is
going to trash climate data, when key decisions were earlier taken by someone
whose responsibility it was to maintain its integrity – and failed.'

NOAA not only failed, but it effectively mounted a cover-up when challenged
over its data. After the paper was published, the US House of Representatives
Science Committee launched an inquiry into its Pausebuster claims. NOAA
refused to comply with subpoenas demanding internal emails from the committee
chairman, the Texas Republican Lamar Smith, and falsely claimed that no one
had raised concerns about the paper internally.

Last night Mr Smith thanked Dr Bates 'for courageously stepping forward to
tell the truth about NOAA's senior officials playing fast and loose with the
data in order to meet a politically predetermined conclusion'. He added: 'The
Karl study used flawed data, was rushed to publication in an effort to support
the President's climate change agenda, and ignored NOAA's own standards for
scientific study.'

Professor Curry, now the president of the Climate Forecast Applications
Network, said last night: 'Large adjustments to the raw data, and substantial
changes in successive dataset versions, imply substantial uncertainties.'

It was time, she said, that politicians and policymakers took these
uncertainties on board.

Last night Mr Karl admitted the data had not been archived when the paper was
published. Asked why he had not waited, he said: 'John Bates is talking about
a formal process that takes a long time.' He denied he was rushing to get the
paper out in time for Paris, saying: 'There was no discussion about Paris.'

They played fast and loose with the figures

He also admitted that the final, approved and 'operational' edition of the
GHCN land data would be 'different' from that used in the paper'.

As for the ERSSTv4 sea dataset, he claimed it was other records – such as the
UK Met Office's – which were wrong, because they understated global warming
and were 'biased too low'. Jeremy Berg, Science's editor-in-chief, said: 'Dr
Bates raises some serious concerns. After the results of any appropriate
investigations… we will consider our options.' He said that 'could include
retracting that paper'.NOAA declined to comment.

## It's not the first time we've exposed dodgy climate data, which is why

we've dubbed it: Climate Gate 2

![Helena Christensen addresses demonstrators in the center of Copenhagen on

climate

change](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![Helena Christensen addresses demonstrators in the center of Copenhagen on

climate

change](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/22/3CD7455F00000578-4192182-image-a-71_1486248706720.jpg)

Helena Christensen addresses demonstrators in the center of Copenhagen on
climate change

Dr John Bates's disclosures about the manipulation of data behind the
'Pausebuster' paper is the biggest scientific scandal since 'Climategate' in
2009 when, as this paper reported, thousands of leaked emails revealed
scientists were trying to block access to data, and using a 'trick' to conceal
embarrassing flaws in their claims about global warming.

Both scandals suggest a lack of transparency and, according to Dr Bates, a
failure to observe proper ethical standards.

Because of NOAA 's failure to 'archive' data used in the paper, its results
can never be verified.

Like Climategate, this scandal is likely to reverberate around the world, and
reignite some of science's most hotly contested debates.

![Blowing up the graph show is disappears in 1961 artfully hidden behind the

other

colours](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![Blowing up the graph show is disappears in 1961 artfully hidden behind the

other

colours](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/23/3CD7C58C00000578-4192182-image-m-95_1486249428566.jpg)

![The reason? Because this is what it shows after 1961, a dramatic decline in

global

temperatures](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

![The reason? Because this is what it shows after 1961, a dramatic decline in

global

temperatures](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/02/04/23/3CD7C72500000578-4192182-image-m-97_1486249524213.jpg)

Left, blowing up the graph show is disappears in 1961 artfully hidden behind
the other colours. Right, the reason? Because this is what it shows after
1961, a dramatic decline in global temperatures

Has there been an unexpected pause in global warming? If so, is the world less
sensitive to carbon dioxide than climate computer models suggest?

And does this mean that truly dangerous global warming is less imminent, and
that politicians' repeated calls for immediate 'urgent action' to curb
emissions are exaggerated?

### Share or comment on this article:

# World leaders duped by manipulated global warming data

        
                  *       *       *       *       *       * e-mail
          *       * 186k
        

shares

## Most watched News videos

        
                  * Black hotel employee’s response to woman who calls him the N-word
          * Donald Trump boards Air Force One as he leaves for Ireland
          * Spitting some rhymes! Adele shows off her rapping skills
          * Police arrest mom who went to the bar and left her crying kids home
          * GRAPHIC: Calves beaten and abused at Fair Oaks dairy farm
          * Elderly Donald Trump supporter knocked to the ground in London
          * Skin-crawling moment furry spider is spotted inside woman’s ear
          * Paraglider who cheated death proposes to nurse who treated him
          * Tracy Morgan yells 'B***h! Get out the car' after crash
          * Lara Trump and Tiffany Trump greet Instagram viewers from London
          * 94-year old D-day veteran's shock after he learns he is live on BBC
          * Damien LeRoy falling 150 feet out of the sky when paragliding in 2016
        

![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/furniture/comments/articles/btn_add-your-

comment.png)

![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/furniture/comments/articles/icon_comments_74.png)

### Comments 2094

Share what you think

        
                  * Newest
          * Oldest
          * Best rated
          * Worst rated
        

View all

The comments below have not been moderated.

View all

The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not
necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline.

We are no longer accepting comments on this article.

## More top stories

Bing

Site Web Enter search term: Search

![](https://ads.creative-serving.com/pixel?id=3140889)

Advertisement

        
                  * **Like** DailyMail
          * **Follow** DailyMail
          * **Follow** @dailymail
          * **Follow** DailyMail
          * **Follow** MailOnline
          * **Follow** Daily Mail
        
          * Download our iPhone app 
          * Download our Android app
        
          * Today's headlines
          * Most Read
        
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/16/14410008-0-image-a-19_1559749819590.jpg) Have we reached solar minimum? The sun has been without spots for 16 consecutive days - and it could lead to...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/22/14474438-0-image-a-11_1559855903668.jpg) Jeff Bezos shows off robotic hands sensitive enough to twirl a Rubik's cube and claims they'll be ready for...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/22/14476094-0-image-a-50_1559857709067.jpg) Apple finally explains how the switch from iTunes will work days after announcing it will kill off the...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14471016-0-image-a-40_1559851282620.jpg) Instagram plans to start showing ads from influencers you don't follow in the feed and Stories
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14458758-0-image-m-12_1559833159414.jpg) 'Extinct' Russian volcano stirs for the first time in human history and could unleash 'catastrophic'...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14477548-0-image-a-17_1559860785475.jpg) D-day invasion was NOT aided by a 'late-rising moon': Expert says the full moon actually came up early and...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14462482-0-image-a-24_1559841052196.jpg) Incredible 2,300-year-old Roman coin emblazoned with the face of 'the first Brexiteer' sells for £550,000 at...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14444438-0-image-m-13_1559814642448.jpg) US Military funds mind-reading helmet that may let soldiers TELEPATHICALLY control robots or drones and...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/20/14467228-0-image-a-7_1559848684326.jpg) Arizona startup unveils aerial surveillance system that uses high-altitude BALLOONS to monitor the ground...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14464184-0-image-a-8_1559839654068.jpg) Google's Stadia gaming service will launch in November with $10 per month Pro subscription plan followed by...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/20/14465970-0-image-a-8_1559850298846.jpg) The terrifying smile of the deep sea dragonfish: Scientists uncover secret behind transparent teeth that...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14454214-0-image-a-23_1559829929525.jpg) Incredible video shows a revolutionary lightweight FOAM stopping an armour-piercing .50 calibre bullet as...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14448628-0-image-m-23_1559823233896.jpg) Scientists discover the LIMIT to human endurance: Research finds performance of even elite athletes is...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14454570-0-image-m-51_1559829289565.jpg) Man's STRESSED friend: Tense dog owners pass their anxiety on to their beloved canine companions because pet...
          * ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14462122-0-image-a-8_1559837084559.jpg) Massive breach exposes financial and personal data from 20 MILLION patients of medical testing firm LabCorp
          * MORE HEADLINES
        
          * 'Puncture-proof' AIRLESS tyres that are cheaper, more durable and better for the environment than traditional versions may be available to buy in just five years 
          * Love Islanders repeat each others phrases because they have no access to the outside world, expert claims 
          * Say good-bye to tiny toiletry bags! Cutting-edge CT scanners at Heathrow airport mean passengers may soon not have to bag up liquids and remove any electronics 
          * Scientists discover the LIMIT to human endurance: Research finds performance of even elite athletes is restricted because the body can only burn a set amount of calories a day 
          * US Military funds mind-reading helmet that may let soldiers TELEPATHICALLY control robots or drones and could even give the gift of sight to the blind 
          * Man's STRESSED friend: Tense dog owners pass their anxiety on to their beloved canine companions because pet pooches mirror human emotions 
          * Incredible 2,300-year-old Roman coin emblazoned with the face of 'the first Brexiteer' sells for £550,000 at auction after being spotted by an amateur metal detectorist 
          * Mona Lisa must have been FAKING her famous smile because her cheeks were not raised and she had a lop-sided grin, proving she was not genuinely emotional, scientists say 
          * Mysterious moons orbiting distant planets are a 'possible source of life' and may be humanity's best chance of finding aliens, scientist claims 
          * Netflix tests Instagram style feed of photos and trailers from upcoming content that you can post on social media 
          * 'Data is the new oil': Rise of internet connected smart products means our private information is increasingly valuable to companies, experts warn 
          * Incredible video shows a revolutionary lightweight FOAM stopping an armour-piercing .50 calibre bullet as experts say it could be used to protect soldiers on the front line 
          * Scientists create an AI-powered computer system that can tell if a baby is hungry, tired or in pain by listening to their cries 
          * 'Extinct' Russian volcano stirs for the first time in human history and could unleash 'catastrophic' devastation similar to the eruption of Vesuvius which destroyed Pompeii in 79AD 
          * Apple finally explains how the switch from iTunes will work days after announcing it will kill off the outdated program 
          * MOST READ IN DETAIL
        

### DON'T MISS

        
                  * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14471426-0-image-a-110_1559851904192.jpg) **'I have to deliver unthinkable news': Country singer Granger Smith reveals his three-year-old son has died in a 'tragic accident'** Horrendous  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14471176-0-image-a-28_1559851568409.jpg) **Kate greets troops as she arrives to watch the Massed Bands of the Household Division during the annual Beating Retreat ceremony**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/22/14476288-0-image-a-23_1559858088329.jpg) **Love Island's new bombshell Molly-Mae invites Tommy for a steamy hot tub date in the Hideaway... amid claims she has a 'secret DJ boyfriend'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/19/14467124-0-image-m-64_1559844447228.jpg) **Brad Pitt and Jennifer Aniston's sprawling former love nest in Beverly Hills hits the market for $49M** Back in 2001 they bought it for $13.5 million  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14476176-0-image-m-32_1559859508706.jpg) **Love Island's Ellie Brown hits the beach in a skimpy thong bikini as she soaks up the sun in Miami    ** Her friend Amber Gill is currently on the show 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/13760564-0-image-m-10_1559814376757.jpg) **From leggings to legs out! Lisa Snowdon teams up with Sainsbury's Tu designer to transform the style of one inspirational woman** Ad Feature
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/00/14477710-0-image-m-2_1559862036380.jpg) **Irina Shayk carries a SUITCASE to her limo amid claims she 'moved out of Bradley Cooper's mansion as their relationship hangs by a thread'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14472742-0-image-a-107_1559853579143.jpg) **Kendall Jenner PICTURE EXCLUSIVE: Star puts on a leggy display in spotted wrap dress as she playfully poses with a rose during dinner in Rome**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14477072-0-image-a-34_1559860322981.jpg) **Love Island: Yewande admits she feels 'down and insecure' because all the 'boys go for Lucie'... as fans praise Anton for boosting her confidence**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14481730-0-image-a-61_1559869136433.jpg) **Love Island viewers do a double take as they're convinced they spot Simon Cowell working out in the villa   ** Could he be the next bombshell? 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/00/14479894-0-image-a-184_1559865328836.jpg) **Paris Hilton displays her trim figure in a bubblegum pink dress as she leaves her London hotel for Cash and Rocket bash** Pretty in pink  
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14480478-0-image-m-18_1559866275956.jpg) **Sophie Turner blames THAT infamous Game Of Thrones coffee cup gaffe on Kit Harington: 'Kit is lazy and I think he would have done that'** Passing blame  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14475922-0-image-m-45_1559860474085.jpg) **Margot Robbie takes Vogue inside her charming California beach house as she raves about working with Quentin Tarantino in 73 Questions**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14462978-0-image-m-19_1559837804249.jpg) **Jennifer Aniston reveals which celebrity texted her when she was fearing for her life during emergency landing on flight to Mexico**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14471970-0-image-a-4_1559852706982.jpg) **Pregnant Myleene Klass, 41, displays her blossoming baby bump in floral maxi as she leads stars at opening night for National Ballet's Cinderella**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/00/14479370-0-image-a-6_1559864155996.jpg) **Lottie Moss displays her sartorial flair in a silk terracotta minidress and cropped denim jacket at beauty bash   ** Lottie  looked effortlessly stylish 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14480084-0-image-a-55_1559866129150.jpg) **Lilly Becker cuts a chic figure in a sheer polka dot shirt and pale pink trousers at Cash & Rocket bash  ** Lilly cut a chic figure on the outing 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14473154-0-image-m-73_1559854038942.jpg) **Brooke Burke, 47, doesn't seem to age as she shows off her very toned figure in a yellow swimsuit while strolling solo in Malibu** Looking good  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14480792-0-image-a-218_1559867028516.jpg) **Laura Whitmore looks chic in a fitted brown floral dress as she joins Katherine Ryan for  Moet Summer House opening bash ** Blonde bombshells 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/00/14479750-0-image-m-53_1559865538524.jpg) **Christine Lampard and Katherine Jenkins look chic in bold prints as they attend  Kelly Hoppen's party ** They always manage to look effortlessly chic 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/00/14478234-0-image-a-119_1559862148299.jpg) **TOWIE star Courtney Green flaunts her incredible figure in blue geometric bikini as she hits the beach with beau  Callum Bushby in Miami **
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14481378-0-image-a-12_1559868355764.jpg) **The secret to Drew Barrymore's toned stomach: Actress has a £4,000 tummy flattening device that uses electromagnets to tighten the muscles  **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/00/14479690-0-image-a-63_1559864794000.jpg) **Michelle Williams and Julianne Moore are caught in the middle of a dark secret in first trailer for remake of Danish classic After The Wedding**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14477904-0-image-m-13_1559861370956.jpg) **Chrissy Teigen and John Legend glam up for lavish Palace of Versailles wedding as they rub shoulders with royalty before going truffle hunting**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14477256-0-image-m-173_1559860238184.jpg) **Brittany Cartwright dons bridal swimsuit and joins her Vanderpump Rules costars on Miami beach** The engaged 30-year-old later joined her fianc e Jax 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/22/14474258-0-image-m-74_1559855454223.jpg) **Kylie Jenner poses seductively in her mirror as she shows off her toned abs in cropped T-shirt** Kylie posted a series of selfie videos  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14478106-0-image-a-163_1559861782322.jpg) **Kendall Jenner flashes her toned stomach in daisy graphic tank top as she fuels up her Porsche during day out in Beverly Hills** Top of the crops  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14453742-0-image-m-10_1559828037560.jpg) **Emily Ratajkowski laughs at 'older white men' who dismiss her as a 'stupid' pinup girl and don't realise she's making a fortune off her designs**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14442968-0-image-m-2_1559812779408.jpg) **Stacey Solomon appears to accidentally reveal the name of her newborn son in now-deleted social media post** Fans are convinced 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14480634-0-image-a-2_1559866473230.jpg) **Amber Davies turns heads in a plunging playsuit as she joins casually chic co-star  Louise Redknapp after 9 To 5: The Musical ** Leading ladies 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/00/14479532-0-image-a-187_1559864499891.jpg) **Kylie Jenner and Khloe Kardashian are doting granddaughters as they treat Kris Jenner's mom MJ to an afternoon together** Family fun  
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/00/14479406-0-image-m-2_1559864614272.jpg) **Halle Berry admits she was 'inebriated' after capturing Academy Award in 2002: 'The whole night is a wash'** The actress, 52, toasted her gong in style  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/04/14484100-0-image-a-21_1559876407280.jpg) **Brad Pitt denounces upcoming Straight Pride Parade demanding they stop using his likeness as its 'mascot'** Brad made no secret about his true feelings  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/02/14481764-0-image-m-21_1559869262400.jpg) **Jada Pinkett Smith says she had 'a TMI moment' while speaking about her porn addiction on Red Table Talk with her mother and daughter**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14450948-0-image-m-6_1559824168044.jpg) **PICTURE EXCLUSIVE: Katie Price kicks off renovations at £2m 'mucky' mansion with freshly-painted exteriors and a refurbished pool **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14477754-0-image-m-52_1559866063870.jpg) **SEBASTIAN SHAKESPEARE: Is Princess Diana's niece set to wed? The engaging mystery of masked Lady Kitty Spencer's new sparkler   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14462464-0-image-m-13_1559837195594.jpg) **Love Island SPOILER: Amy 'instigates a snuggle' with Curtis in BED as the pair's fledgling romance hots up   ** Moving quickly 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14462958-0-image-a-1_1559837783288.jpg) **Black Widow PICTURE EXCLUSIVE: Scarlett Johansson returns to THOSE iconic red tresses as filming begins for long-awaited spin-off**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14471014-0-image-m-22_1559852878691.jpg) **Jordan Pickford's fianc ee Megan Davison shows off her incredible post-baby body at England game four months after welcoming a baby boy **
          * ![FILE - In this April 26, 2008 file photo, Dr. John performs during the 2008 New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival in New Orleans. The family of the Louisiana-born musician known as Dr. John says the celebrated singer and piano player who blended black and white musical influence with a hoodoo-infused stage persona and gravelly bayou drawl, has died. He was 77. A family statement released by his publicist says Dr. John, who was born Mac Rebennack, died early Thursday of a heart attack. \(AP Photo/Dave Martin, File\)](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![FILE - In this April 26, 2008 file photo, Dr. John performs during the 2008 New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival in New Orleans. The family of the Louisiana-born musician known as Dr. John says the celebrated singer and piano player who blended black and white musical influence with a hoodoo-infused stage persona and gravelly bayou drawl, has died. He was 77. A family statement released by his publicist says Dr. John, who was born Mac Rebennack, died early Thursday of a heart attack. \(AP Photo/Dave Martin, File\)](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/wire-14477606-1559860726-195_154x115.jpg) **BREAKING NEWS: Dr. John, the New Orleans 'night-tripper' and pianist, dies 77** The New Orleans musician  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14480868-0-image-m-46_1559867846768.jpg) **CLAUDIA CONNELL reviews last night's TV: Pity the poor shepherd whose prize ram is a confirmed bachelor   ** In My Gay Dog and Other Animals (C4) 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/00/14479414-0-image-m-17_1559864607942.jpg) **Dolly Parton admits that she wears make-up in BED in case she has to be rescued from a blaze by hunky firefighters   ** Always prepared 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/20/14469034-0-image-a-130_1559847907095.jpg) **'You are not at a fashion show!' Melania Trump is called 'disrespectful' and 'rude' for wearing sunglasses during D-Day commemoration**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/20/14470720-0-image-m-44_1559850834032.jpg) **Kourtney Kardashian flaunts fab figure in lacy two-piece number as she blogs about Bali trip: 'I left there feeling spiritually fulfilled'** Feeling spiritual  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14476266-0-image-m-29_1559858818981.jpg) **Lori Loughlin's fashion designer husband Mossimo Giannulli checks himself into luxury hotel amid college admissions scandal**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14481482-0-image-a-28_1559868637284.jpg) **BAZ BAMIGBOYE: Salesman to ply his trade in West End as Arthur Miller's famous play transfers to the Piccadilly Theatre   ** One to check out 
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/19/14467748-0-image-m-56_1559846101840.jpg) **Molly Moorish is glamorous in teal mini-dress as she joins brother Lennon at premiere of father Liam Gallagher's new documentary As It Was**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/22/14475768-0-image-m-62_1559857042298.jpg) **Kaia Gerber, 17, is seen with a mystery man in NYC... after being spotted with singer Harry Hudson, 24, the day before** She's had a busy week 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14461366-0-image-m-12_1559837184474.jpg) **Sophie Turner VICIOUSLY SLAPS Conan O'Brien during interview... but it is all for a drinking game** The 23-year-old actress left the audience wincing 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/19/14468550-0-image-m-30_1559847036514.jpg) **Khloe Kardashian showcases her flat abs as she carries daughter True in stylish promo for Good American jeans** Her Revenge Body 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14473676-0-image-m-69_1559854657751.jpg) **Kim Kardashian shares photos of her sweet 16 birthday cake from 1996: 'We even had our Hansen's Cakes back then'** Throwback snaps  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/02/14481968-0-image-m-5_1559869635312.jpg) **Dennis Quaid 'SPLITS from girlfriend Santa Auzina, 32, after three years together... and has now begun dating Laura Savoie, 26'** Has moved on  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/22/14473366-0-image-a-65_1559855121805.jpg) **The women shaping the UK: From Meghan (and her wedding dress designer) to Fleabag star Phoebe, Vogue lists the country's Top 25 female high-fliers**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/00/14479846-0-image-m-41_1559865260750.jpg) **'She's the Queen of pop!' Craig David reveals lifelong dream to collaborate with Beyonc e - and says he's idolised her since her Destiny's Child days **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14481090-0-image-m-37_1559867805051.jpg) **Why so glum? FKA Twigs hides her face as she touches down in Sydney - just weeks after splitting from Shia LaBeouf to 'focus on her career'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/22/14476178-0-image-m-79_1559857905755.jpg) **Michelle Williams describes her acting gig on Dawson's Creek to be like 'factory work' and 'formulaic' which   turned her off from doing TV for years **
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/22/14476018-0-image-m-89_1559857646678.jpg) **DC Universe cancels Swamp Thing just days after first episode of new superhero series aired**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/19/14467212-0-image-a-34_1559844716177.jpg) **Blue's Simon Webbe reveals he spent £40k a WEEK at the height of the band's fame... before money woes led him to file for bankruptcy **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14478144-0-image-a-208_1559861921006.jpg) **Love Island's Megan Barton Hanson and Rosie Williams look effortlessly stylish as they step out for day of filming in London   ** Glamorous gal pals 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/20/14469532-0-image-m-68_1559848699206.jpg) **Diddy proudly celebrates his twin daughters' graduation while acknowledging their mother Kim Porter who passed away last year**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14456728-0-image-a-33_1559831119886.jpg) **Love Island SPOILER: Joe reveals hypocrisy as he makes a play for Amber after condemning Lucie for flirting with Tommy... as the drama rumbles on   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14471006-0-image-a-114_1559851247099.jpg) **Priyanka Chopra cuts a casual figure in denim jacket and grey tracksuit bottoms as she touches down in Mumbai   ** Former Miss World 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14442436-0-image-a-65_1559812076255.jpg) **'Becky about to get her wig split!' Beyonce's FURIOUS reaction to Nicole Curran - wife of Golden State Warriors' owner - cutting across her to chat to Jay Z   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/19/14466898-0-image-a-22_1559844132009.jpg) **Kelly Brook shows off her weight loss in boho minidress as she reveals she has dropped TWO dress sizes and is back to 'feeling my best'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14471658-0-image-m-83_1559852328047.jpg) **Jamie Lynn Spears and family enjoy her big sister Britney's $7.4M Thousand Oaks mansion and pool** The Louisiana-based 28-year-old Insta-storied  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14463908-0-image-a-4_1559839174158.jpg) **Sam Faiers is effortlessly stylish in a tan top and matching trousers as she joins her mother Sue for lunch in London** Two's company 
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14465300-0-image-m-42_1559841174341.jpg) **Kylie Jenner 'leaves nightclub' soon after Khloe's ex Tristan Thompson and Kendall's former beau Ben Simmons show up** Slipped out  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/19/14467550-0-image-m-17_1559845695704.jpg) **Kate Hudson posts photo of hilarious spray-tan mishap as she tells fans: 'Oh, that indeed is a terrible fail!'** Kate embraced a little bit of self-deprecation  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14460850-0-image-m-114_1559836388507.jpg) **'I was a chubbier child': Love Island's Joe Garratt is barely-recognisable in baby-faced throwbacks... before revealing hunky body transformation**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14476986-0-image-a-4_1559859628197.jpg) **Justin Bieber rocks tie-dye hoodie for solo outing to the mall.... after getting into a minor fender bender** Justin rocked a tie-dye hoodie  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14473316-0-image-m-52_1559854242295.jpg) **Lisa Rinna and Kyle Richards are 'hot messes' as they share makeup-free selfies following glam RHOBH reunion** Hot messes  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/20/14469496-0-image-m-48_1559848559467.jpg) **Kim Kardashian proves she is just as messy as a normal person as she shares flashback image from a fitting with clothes on the floor**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14458428-0-image-a-54_1559832872920.jpg) **Little Mix's Jade Thirlwall leaves her fans in hysterics as she posts bikini snap with a VERY cheeky optical illusion   ** Cheeky 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14462600-0-image-m-23_1559837289515.jpg) **Heidi Pratt dons double denim as she teams up with Audrina Patridge to shoot The Hills: New Beginnings** The duo looked pleased to to see one another 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14466090-0-image-m-62_1559842677235.jpg) **Rami Malek and Lucy Boynton can't hide their love as they stroll around SoHo hand-in-hand** They sparked a romance while working together  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14461824-0-image-m-29_1559836386672.jpg) **Kris Jenner worries Kourtney Kardashian is 'still in love' with ex Scott Disick after mom-of-three joined him on THAT trip to Mexico with Sofia Richie**
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14465278-0-image-m-36_1559841111749.jpg) **Kylie Jenner's friendship with estranged BFF Jordyn Woods is 'on the road to recovery'** It fell apart after Jordyn kissed Tristan Thompson 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/19/14467126-0-image-m-15_1559844500132.jpg) **Emily Ratajkowski looks heavenly in all white after sharing sultry 70s style bikini shoot for her own Inamorata Swim** Chic  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14452864-0-image-m-109_1559826751726.jpg) **Inside the Beckhams' Miami holiday: Family stayed in J-Lo's ex Marc Anthony's $20m Mediterranean-style waterfront mansion with 12 bedrooms**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14459270-0-image-a-31_1559833679390.jpg) **Harry banters with a Chelsea Pensioner during his D-Day visit - and tells another veteran he's 'lucky' to have three nurses looking after him**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14456352-0-image-a-125_1559830908799.jpg) **Love Island's new bombshell Molly-Mae Hague comes under fire for a historic 'homophobic tweet' just hours before she enters the villa**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14466224-0-image-m-10_1559842934239.jpg) **Cindy Crawford glows as she is seen in New York City... after spending the day with her teen kids Kaia and Presley** Radiant  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14457530-0-image-m-76_1559832075607.jpg) **Lindsay Lohan steals Marilyn Monroe's style as she goes NAKED in retro-inspired Playboy shoot... complete with peroxide blonde tresses and sky-high heels**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14456480-0-image-m-15_1559830860029.jpg) **Irina Shayk looks cheery on park trip with daughter, two, amid claims she has 'moved out of Bradley Cooper's home as relationship hangs by a thread'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14458994-0-image-m-26_1559833744957.jpg) **Lizzie Cundy was told to squeeze a 'naked' Pierce Brosnan 'to death' on the set of James Bond as she details most bizarre star encounters   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14458266-0-image-m-50_1559832739306.jpg) **Katie Price 'undergoes corrective breast surgery after infection left a dent in her bust'... one month on from star's face lift and liposuction**
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14466596-0-image-a-64_1559843593563.jpg) **Olivia Munn reveals one of her exes left her feeling 'worthless' as she adds she doesn't think she will ever get married and have kids** Candid chat  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14456822-0-image-m-74_1559831347782.jpg) **Not a wrinkle in sight! Hollywood actress Nicole Kidman, 51, shows off her impossibly smooth skin as she promotes Big Little Lies**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/20/14466704-0-image-m-44_1559848462490.jpg) **Olivia Culpo flashes her toned tummy in flashback photo with look-alike sister Sophia** Olivia , 27, shared a photo of her lookalike younger sister 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14459522-0-image-a-93_1559834238179.jpg) **Naomi Campbell, 49, shows off her supermodel figure in a glamorous photoshoot as she discusses her love of sustainable fashion**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14464826-0-image-m-32_1559840652760.jpg) **Jamie Oliver's wife Jools cuts a casual figure in bomber jacket and leggings... after her husband's restaurant business went into administration**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14453172-0-image-a-24_1559827730233.jpg) **EXCLUSIVE: Queer Eye's Tan France shares intimate photos and tells how he would bleached his skin to avoid being bullied and hid his love for Barbies   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14465848-0-image-m-40_1559841945570.jpg) **Nicky Hilton makes a rare appearance with both her kids in NYC as she models an elegant summer dress while pushing their double stroller**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14454118-0-image-m-78_1559829179036.jpg) **The Queen 'knows me so well': Trump pays tribute to 'incredible lady' Her Majesty and tells the French media about the 'many hours' they spent together**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/12/14447712-0-image-a-98_1559819158772.jpg) **Prince William delivers speech at the National Memorial Arboretum while Harry visits the Royal Hospital Chelsea as the princes lead D-Day commemorations   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/21/14472048-0-image-m-4_1559852837790.jpg) **Kelly Ripa 'finally' gets approval to share two prom photos of 17-year-old daughter Lola Consuelos to Instagram** It took some time for Kelly to get approval 
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![Melania](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![Melania](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/linkListItem-0-14449776-22_154x117.jpg) **Melania Trump looks sombre in black while Brigitte Macron is elegant in cream as they join the D-Day commemorations in Normandy   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14464862-0-image-a-19_1559840684557.jpg) **Rhian Sugden sets pulses racing as she flaunts her jaw-dropping curves in skimpy bikinis on belated honeymoon with husband Oliver Mellor**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14454804-0-image-m-3_1559831973499.jpg) **Megan Barton-Hanson makes VERY lewd comment about Love Island's Tommy... as   bisexual star will be set up with men and women on Celebs Go Dating **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14463506-0-image-m-35_1559838662533.jpg) **Stranger Things couple Natalia Dyer and Charlie Heaton look super affectionate as they enjoy a romantic stroll in NYC** Cute couple  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14421310-0-image-m-23_1559833048882.jpg) **Brad Pitt the single dad: The star 'likes to cook and watch movies with his kids'... nearly three years after Angelina Jolie split** Doting dad 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14459176-0-image-m-5_1559837308375.jpg) **Jonas Brothers rock retro suede Gucci suits on Harper's Bazaar special men's digital cover as they say they are fine with being 'uncool'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/12/14449610-0-image-m-48_1559822359531.jpg) **Liam Payne, 25, appears to move on from Naomi Campbell, 49, with model Duckie Thot, 23... with fans marvelling at his 'modelising' behaviour   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/11/14444736-0-image-a-41_1559815457227.jpg) **Chloe Green sheds ring AGAIN as she poses with Paris Hilton and Lilly Becker at Cash & Rocket rally... amid claims Jeremy Meeks romance 'is on rocks' **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/19/14468670-0-image-a-97_1559847297380.jpg) **Erin Bates of Bringing Up Bates is pregnant with her fourth child, one year after welcoming Everly: 'Life is fixing to be even crazier'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14459434-0-image-m-35_1559835373163.jpg) **R. Kelly appears in court AGAIN to plead not guilty to 11 sexual assault charges    ** The 52-year-old singer returned to court in Chicago 
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/23/14477128-0-image-a-4_1559860145681.jpg) **Beach Boys star Brian Wilson cancels tour due to mental health worries: 'I've been struggling with stuff in my head'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14449700-0-image-a-28_1559823489066.jpg) **Hollyoaks star Andy Newton-Lee appears upbeat at LAX airport days after detailing how prescription drug abuse left him in a coma   ** Bouncing back 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14462538-0-image-m-22_1559837206109.jpg) **Margot Robbie reveals playing Sharon Tate in Once Upon A Time In Hollywood was not easy:  'It was such a strange challenge' ** Candid chat 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14464122-0-image-m-31_1559840932983.jpg) **Anna Nicole Smith's daughter Dannielynn Birkhead, 12, is surprised with Hamilton Musical tickets by dad Larry for 7th grade graduation gift**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14461954-0-image-m-2_1559836591439.jpg) **Brooke Hogan models plunging black gown at CMTs as she explains she moved from Los Angeles to Nashville because she wanted a 'normal' life**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/20/14470564-0-image-m-18_1559850451961.jpg) **Joey Fatone confirms he's 'going through a divorce' with estranged wife Kelly Baldwin during red carpet appearance with girlfriend**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/19/14466854-0-image-m-48_1559844055074.jpg) **Carrie Fisher's daughter Billie Lourd wears a bikini during Mexico vacation with  boyfriend... after revealing she will be in the next Star Wars film **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14451252-0-image-m-27_1559828601073.jpg) **EXCL: Gordon Ramsay splashes out £80k on two trendy 'igloos' at £7m London mansion - after David Beckham and Guy Ritchie had them installed too **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14460064-0-image-m-97_1559834449605.jpg) **Jessie J turns heads in a plunging floral 80s-style dress as she joins chic Pixie Lott and Emma Willis at The Voice Kids photocall   ** Joining forces 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14457664-0-image-m-14_1559833630978.jpg) **Kate Moss nails casual chic in a monochrome shirt and flared trousers as the model enjoys a casual stroll around Soho** Catwalk queen 
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14462596-0-image-a-36_1559839297669.jpg) **Festive in flower print: Crown Princess Victoria looks in great spirits as she joins her husband Prince Daniel to celebrate Sweden's National Day**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14462666-0-image-a-25_1559837474947.jpg) **I feel raped': Madonna, 60, savages journalist for focusing on her age in 'superficial' interview in 'proof that NYT is one of the founding fathers of the patriarchy'   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/19/14467434-0-image-m-28_1559845374040.jpg) **Rob Kardashian enlists his MOM to run new Instagram account two years after being banned from the platform for revenge porn**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14457786-0-image-m-162_1559832327485.jpg) **Halsey shows off her trim figure in a tiny ripped crop top as she begs Sophie Turner not to 'get mad' after branding Jonas Brothers 'very sexy'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14462964-0-image-m-18_1559837798414.jpg) **Kyle Richards proves age is just a number as she stuns in neon dress... after saying 'I never imagined I would feel so good, healthy and at peace at 50'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14452506-0-image-a-4_1559826823556.jpg) **True blue! Queen Letizia of Spain recycles a favourite pair of navy Hugo Boss trousers as she visits a cultural centre in Madrid** Chic 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/18/14465622-0-image-m-29_1559842504111.jpg) **Rachel Brosnahan and David Spade pay tribute on Instagram to Kate Spade one year after the designer's death** The 55-year-old fashion icon took her own life   
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14443562-0-image-m-17_1559813542148.jpg) **Manchester United ace Lee Sharpe, 47, cannot stop beaming as he weds bride Lucie Gardner, 33, in front of vying admirers during Amalfi Coast ceremony**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14454534-0-image-m-37_1559832244341.jpg) **It REALLY is what it is! Love Islanders repeat phrases like 'I'm loyal babes' and 'bev' because they have no access to outside world and copy each other   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14456900-0-image-m-40_1559831326268.jpg) **Ronnie Wood, 72, looks stylish in patterned shirt as glamorous wife Sally, 41, joins him at his Rolling Stones tour rehearsals   **
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14451060-0-image-m-81_1559824160796.jpg) **Perrie Edwards reveals she has no sense of smell as she whips up a curry for bandmates before rewarding them with puppies in DRESSES   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14451738-0-image-a-95_1559825037284.jpg) **Helena Bonham Carter, 54, sports her signature quirky style as she enjoys casual stroll with toyboy beau Rye Dag Holmboe, 32, in London**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14452494-0-image-m-139_1559826149414.jpg) **Jodie Comer was 'so insecure' about her body as a teen that she 'lost interest in acting because I was so obsessed with how I looked'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14454928-0-image-m-62_1559829530533.jpg) **First look at Mackenzie Crook as talking scarecrow Worzel Gummidge as actor writes, directs and stars in revival of 70s favourite**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14452704-0-image-m-85_1559826409275.jpg) **Kate Moss swaps her trademark boho style for tailored looks and a bold fringe in Giorgio Armani campaign... as she teams with the designer for first time   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14450166-0-image-m-51_1559824130646.jpg) **Laura Linney gushes about returning to Tales Of The City for a Netflix mini-series 18 years after the show 'changed her life'** Comeback 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/12/14446710-0-image-m-23_1559819346615.jpg) **Amanda Holden reignites her feud with Phillip Schofield as she compares the TV presenter to a household pest** Ouch 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14450162-0-image-m-40_1559823287163.jpg) **Dani Dyer reveals her dad Danny approves of her new relationship with Sammy Kimmence... as she gives Love Island's Lucie dating advice**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14457250-0-image-a-4_1559831622684.jpg) **Loose Women's Denise Welch SWEARS live on air as she jokes 'Madonna doesn't like her old t*ts' during chat about regrets from the past**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/07/14437356-0-image-m-17_1559804159988.jpg) **Jacqueline Jossa wants to see 'more curvy ladies' on Love Island as she shares bikini snap to say 'thank you' to post-baby body and 'lumps and bumps'**
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14458244-0-image-m-11_1559832658600.jpg) **'I was not in a good place': Amelia Hamlin says she lashed out at her father Harry because of her 'fear of food' amid anorexia battle**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14442410-0-image-m-9_1559813533178.jpg) **Love Island fans hail Curtis 'the hero we do not deserve' and gush over his sweet date with Amy, his kind words for Lucie and a blossoming bromance with Tommy   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14456440-0-image-a-31_1559830782477.jpg) **Shakira insists she is innocent of wrongdoing after being questioned by a Spanish judge over alleged £13million tax evasion **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14452954-0-image-a-31_1559827009029.jpg) **Holly Willoughby left red-faced as guest describes how her lesbian pugs have sex... before laughing over Phillip Schofield's pronunciation   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/12/14448846-0-image-m-75_1559820921712.jpg) **Shane Warne says he'll 'always care' for ex-girlfriend Elizabeth Hurley as he reflects on the 'great times' during their four-year romance** Still close 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/12/14447414-0-image-m-32_1559818816766.jpg) **Keith Lemon EXCL: Star pokes fun at Caroline Flack's Love Island gig... (claiming she's never on it) and discusses Mel B's intimate area**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/17/14463004-0-image-a-85_1559837867632.jpg) **A kiss for Camilla! Decorated veteran plants a peck on the Duchess' cheek as she joins Prince Charles in Normandy for D-Day commemorations**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14454470-0-image-m-7_1559829004670.jpg) **Nicky Hilton spins around on teacup ride with daughter Lily-Grace at the Good+ Foundation bash in New York City** Stepping out  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/14/14452440-0-image-m-94_1559827721142.jpg) **Jennifer Ellison sips a healthy green juice as she leaves the gym following a gruelling workout** The former Brookside actress 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/12/14447508-0-image-m-41_1559818878204.jpg) **'One step at a time': Katy Perry admits she and Orlando Bloom are taking wedding planning slowly... nine years after marrying ex Russell Brand**
          * Advertisement
        
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14456354-0-image-m-4_1559830804354.jpg) **Jenelle Evans shares snap of cross given to her by son after losing custody: 'A child's love for their mother will never fade'** Teen Mom 2 star 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/11/14446650-0-image-m-15_1559818250151.jpg) **Hollyoaks' Stephanie Waring reveals she's been teetotal for three months as she admits she 'feels so much better' since ditching alcohol**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/17/14410400-0-image-a-23_1559750455873.jpg) **Princess Anne STILL the hardest-working royal, racking up four times more days on duty than Meghan who's carried out 16 this year - while Kate's done 25**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14450904-0-image-m-27_1559823879450.jpg) **James Corden snipes at Trump as he tells Americans 'all the people that I like and respect' are not fans of the President** On The Late Show 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/23/14425250-0-image-m-16_1559773792362.jpg) **Love Island: Viewers SLAM 'creepy' Joe for 'possessiveness' towards Lucie as they compare him to obsessive stalker in hit Netflix show You**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/11/14446636-0-image-m-18_1559817427120.jpg) **Jenelle Evans' ex Nathan Griffith 'reached out to Teen Mom star and her husband David Eason' after EXPLOSIVE row amid custody battle**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/09/14441382-0-image-m-40_1559810736977.jpg) **Catherine Tyldesley EXCL: Star 'doesn't recognise person she was before she dropped seven dress sizes, but STILL worries about wibbly-wobbly bits'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/11/14445250-0-image-m-126_1559815536372.jpg) **'His type on paper': Love Island star Curtis' ex girlfriend Emily Barker looks remarkably similar to new romantic interest Amy**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/15/14456802-0-image-m-10_1559831210709.jpg) **Gisele Bundchen poses topless for Elle's Sustainability Issue as she talks preserving rain forests: 'Our survival depends on it'**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14461188-0-image-m-27_1559835619809.jpg) **RHOBH star Lisa Rinna rocks a blonde wig as she steps out for post reunion dinner with Denise, Dorit and Kyle... as Lisa Vanderpump skips filming**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14450388-0-image-a-11_1559823381211.jpg) **PIERS MORGAN: The Queen may also think Bette Midler's a washed-up psycho, Mr. President, but she'd never tell us - if you want to be as popular as your royal hero, quit the trash talk**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14444004-0-image-a-74_1559814149792.jpg) **Happy National Day! Sweden's Princess Sofia is a ray of sunshine in traditional dress as she celebrates with husband Prince Carl Phillip**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/11/14446372-0-image-m-24_1559817152367.jpg) **Ex-Rolling Stones rocker Bill Wyman, 82, puts on a loved-up display with wife Suzanne Accosta, 49, as the pair head for lavish dinner at The Ritz   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/11/14444936-0-image-a-108_1559815290456.jpg) **Pixie Lott reveals she has pushed back wedding to fianc e Oliver Cheshire until next year and says she is STILL going to have 18 bridesmaids **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/09/14390898-0-image-m-21_1559722829630.jpg) **Lawyers for woman accusing Cristiano Ronaldo of rape moved case to federal court so the footballer can be served papers in Italy, attorney reveals   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14438244-0-image-m-20_1559806142162.jpg) **Bradley Cooper looks downcast as he leaves a friend's house amid claims Irina Shayk has 'moved out of his $4.5m mansion as relationship hangs by a thread'   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14443394-0-image-m-47_1559813185908.jpg) **Little Mix's pink-haired Jesy Nelson shares racy picture of herself wearing pink bra and see-through neon perspex shorts   ** Glamorous 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/11/14445312-0-image-m-2_1559815664159.jpg) **'You've got the wrong girl!': Sophie Turner recalls the hilarious moment husband Joe Jonas nearly kissed her stunt double on Game of Thrones set**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14442790-0-image-m-14_1559812507241.jpg) **Former James Bond Timothy Dalton, 73, passionately kisses a glamorous mystery woman during steamy outing in Italy** Romantic  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14442654-0-image-m-64_1559812326817.jpg) **TOWIE star-turned-WAG Georgina Cleverley displays her sizzling frame in striped bikini as she cosies up to husband Tom on Mykonos break**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14438996-0-image-m-10_1559807251799.jpg) **Bella Thorne EXCLUSIVE 'She's an angel': Actress helps a fan come out as bisexual as they share an empowering kiss at Pride event in LA**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/11/14447452-0-image-a-42_1559818593056.jpg) **Hollywood hunk Chris Hemsworth and his co-star Tessa Thompson rock custom suits at Men in Black photo call in Moscow with Frank the Pug**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14452412-0-image-a-117_1559825752891.jpg) **Kevin Hart and Tiffany Haddish can't contain their laughter as they arrive at the Sydney premiere for The Secret Life of Pets 2** In good spirits 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/01/14428846-0-image-m-4_1559780833188.jpg) **Kim Kardashian showcases curves in figure-hugging ensemble as sister Kourtney is stylish in pantsuit filming scenes for KUWTK**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14440462-0-image-a-14_1559813741399.jpg) **Casey Affleck and girlfriend Floriana Lima look smitten as they make a rare red carpet appearance at American Woman premiere   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/21/14419268-0-image-m-7_1559765970551.jpg) **Chloe Green fails to raise a smile at charity gala amid claims relationship with Jeremy Meeks is 'on the rocks' after he missed their son's birthday**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/20/14418774-0-image-a-37_1559763491024.jpg) **Love Island: Meet NEW BOMBSHELL Molly-Mae Hague, the ex-girlfriend of Leicester City's James Maddison, who is set to ruffle feathers in shock twist**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/09/14440778-0-image-m-2_1559811309041.jpg) **Cindy Crawford oozes glamour in chic black dress as the supermodel enjoys lunch date with children Presley and Kaia Gerber** Family fun 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/00/14427242-0-image-m-15_1559777757648.jpg) **Love Island: Fans demand to know why 'stunning', 'intelligent' Yewande isn't getting any airtime... while 'annoying' Amber and Lucie are**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/09/14440464-0-image-m-65_1559809783790.jpg) **Ronnie Corbett's widow, 86, reveals she was thinking of buying back her old home from JLS star Orits e Williams before it was destroyed by fire **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/10/14443074-0-image-m-31_1559812810079.jpg) **Winnie Harlow flashes her abs in a sporty crop top as she shares a joke with musician Harry Hudson on a low-key stroll through New York City**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/23/14423104-0-image-m-6_1559774849594.jpg) **Love Island: Tommy 'digs himself a hole' as he flits between Amber and Lucie trying to woo them both without ANY luck** Oh dear  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/07/14437238-0-image-a-127_1559803545140.jpg) **Barbra Streisand shares photo of her beloved pooches posing at the grave of the singer's late dog they were CLONED from** Puppy love 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14438414-0-image-m-35_1559807512686.jpg) **Ashley Graham wows in tight lime green top and skinny jeans as she laughs her way through impromptu photoshoot with pals in New York City**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/22/14424166-0-image-m-51_1559771891754.jpg) **Kim Kardashian makes mom Kris Jenner cry after announcing she's taking the reins of the family Christmas Eve party** Emotional  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/13/14450904-0-image-m-27_1559823879450.jpg) **James Corden says 'all the people that I like and respect' are not fans of Trump as presenter is quizzed over President's visit to Britain**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14439154-0-image-m-29_1559807750794.jpg) **Jada Pinkett Smith, 47, shows off her ageless physique in an edgy bralet with racy chainmail top as she sashays into Jimmy Kimmel Live**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/16/14461102-0-image-a-20_1559835736757.jpg) **The View's Abby Huntsman and husband Jeffrey Livingston welcome twins Ruby and William... ONE YEAR after having first child**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/09/14440770-0-image-m-24_1559810652969.jpg) **Model who claims she was raped by Brazilian football star Neymar is filmed hitting him in hotel room a day after alleged attack   ** Spoke out 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14438176-0-image-m-17_1559805607959.jpg) **Sienna Miller goes braless in an extreme plunging gold sequin dress for American Woman premiere in Hollywood** Golden girl 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/01/14428336-0-image-a-37_1559779533405.jpg) **Emily Ratajkowski flaunts her incredible figure in an array of barely-there bikinis as she poses for 70s-style photoshoot** Pin up 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/09/14439502-0-image-m-13_1559809005591.jpg) **Gerard Butler looks delighted as he chats with a starstruck female fan during cinema trip in LA** The actor, 49, was in good spirits  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14438308-0-image-a-40_1559805890778.jpg) **Lilly Becker oozes elegance in a black gown as she steps out after reaching agreement with ex Boris over arrangements to look after their son**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/18/14413524-0-image-m-128_1559754590364.jpg) **PICTURE EXCLUSIVE: Kylie Jenner the billion dollar booty queen! Buxom make-up mogul wears thong and sheer outfit for racy Malibu beach shoot**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14437680-0-image-m-2_1559806321233.jpg) **Jude Law, 46, and new wife Phillipa Coan, 32, prove inseparable as they pack on the PDA on their Italian honeymoon after surprise wedding**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14437754-0-image-m-2_1559804893464.jpg) **Pixie Lott exudes glamour in a black mini-dress as she cosies up to fianc e Oliver Cheshire at restaurant launch ** Bride-to-be 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/05/14433332-0-image-a-61_1559793767629.jpg) **Beyonce and Jay-Z watch rapt as the Warriors play the Raptors from courtside seats during the NBA Finals** Date night 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/20/14419374-0-image-a-1_1559764555587.jpg) **Stop being so mean to Melania! Critics back home sneer she's icy but one new admirer says it's time we judged the First Lady on her own terms   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14437714-0-image-m-321_1559804742373.jpg) **Justin Bieber gets in a minor fender bender in Hollywood before heading to church service with his wife Hailey** Keeping the faith 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/20/14418870-0-image-m-82_1559763260576.jpg) **Stacey Solomon shares candid breastfeeding post with newborn son as she admits she's been struggling   ** Candid 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/11/14443772-0-image-m-46_1559815530579.jpg) **Gisele Bundchen sizzles in gold jogging bottoms and black crop top as she models in sensational new Rosa Cha campaign** Fashionable 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14438668-0-image-a-1_1559806866412.jpg) **Lady Kitty Spencer stuns in jumpsuit and rocks VERY large diamond ring on her engagement finger - after going public with 60-year-old tycoon**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/01/14429390-0-image-m-60_1559782134381.jpg) **Caroline Flack 'upset' after Kelly Brook mocked her live on radio for 'copying her life' by hosting Love Island and 'dating' Danny Cipriani**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/17/14413100-0-image-a-7_1559753890483.jpg) **Tiffany Trump stuns in a white jacket with a colourful cherub pattern as she leaves her London hotel at the end of her father's State Visit**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/02/14430800-0-image-m-26_1559785744472.jpg) **Kate Upton showcases her stunning figure in black bathing suit... just seven months after welcoming her baby daughter** Looking good 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/00/14428148-0-image-m-84_1559779181151.jpg) **Poldark's Aidan Turner looks worlds away from Captain Ross as he debuts bushy beard at season five premiere** Embracing a brand new look 
          * ![Queen](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![Queen](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/18/linkListItem-68437221-14413250-439_154x115.jpg) **'I hope you come to this country again soon': What the Queen told Donald Trump at the end of his state visit as he bid fond farewell to Britain**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/12/14397586-0-image-m-95_1559732902668.jpg) **'On behalf of the free world, thank you' The Queen pays tribute to D-Day heroes at 75th anniversary commemorations alongside Trump**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/19/14415792-0-image-a-17_1559758708974.jpg) **Pregnant Rachel Riley displays her blossoming baby bump as she leaves Countdown filming with beau  Pasha Kovalev in Manchester **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/00/14425194-0-image-a-15_1559775643414.jpg) **Pamela Anderson arrives in LA after spending time in Paris with beau Adil Rami... as she says Julian Assange 'would end up dead' if he comes to US**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/18/14413288-0-image-m-2_1559754316233.jpg) **PICTURE EXCLUSIVE: Kendall Jenner stuns in an elaborate red Giambattista Valli gown as she shoots H &M campaign in a maze in Rome **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/09/14441100-0-image-a-60_1559810511037.jpg) **Rochelle Humes enjoys a smooch with husband Marvin as she larks about with ex-TOWIE star Georgina Cleverley on sunny Mykonos getaway**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/08/14438360-0-image-m-2_1559805995852.jpg) **Gordon Ramsay, 52, exhibits his VERY hunky physique in tight T-shirt as he enjoys a coffee break in Hollywood   ** Hitting the gym 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/06/14435962-0-image-a-67_1559800508951.jpg) **Dakota Johnson pulls up shirt and jacket to reveal her bare back while shooting a scene for the upcoming romance-comedy film Covers**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/01/14428844-0-image-m-62_1559780873274.jpg) **2019 CMT Music Awards: Carrie Underwood joins Maren Morris and Jessie James Decker in leggy looks at star-studded red carpet**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/02/14430442-0-image-m-77_1559784379418.jpg) **Sarah Hyland puts on a leggy display in a sequined little black dress with a low-cut neckline as she attends the 2019 CMT Music Awards**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/00/14428102-0-image-a-169_1559779117794.jpg) **Cara Delevingne and Ashley Benson grab fresh drinks after hitting the gym for a tough sweat session in Los Angeles** Working up a sweat 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/05/14434056-0-image-a-126_1559796078200.jpg) **James Corden reveals how he got Tom Cruise's phone number as well as his pre-presidential run-in with Donald Trump during chat with Howard Stern**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/04/14432974-0-image-m-61_1559792670044.jpg) **Michelle Pfeiffer and David E. Kelley are a sartorially elegant couple at Fragrance Foundation Awards in NYC** Stepping out 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/07/14436092-0-image-m-183_1559800939277.jpg) **Jerry Seinfeld and his wife Jessica attend the Good+ Foundation bash in New York City together with their two kids** Family outing 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/16/14408974-0-image-m-137_1559749575186.jpg) **Love Island star Lucie Donlan's remarkable TWO STONE weight loss is documented in throwback snaps as she dropped from a size 12 to 6   **
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/04/20/14370430-0-image-a-40_1559676351630.jpg) **Bond faces his most difficult opponent yet as Health and Safety inspectors arrive at Pinewood following the stunt explosion which blew up the set**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/00/14426188-0-image-m-51_1559775953464.jpg) **Killing Eve's Sandra Oh recalls being told she wouldn't make it in Hollywood because of her Asian heritage and she still struggles with self-doubt**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/05/14433854-0-image-a-49_1559796803421.jpg) **Chantel Jeffries enjoys an alfresco lunch as she matches hairdos with gal pal Cindy Kimberly in Los Angeles   ** Stepping out 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/22/14423300-0-image-m-93_1559770224926.jpg) **Riverdale's Camila Mendes and co-star boyfriend Charles Melton pack on the PDA during trip to the gym... after returning home from Paris**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/01/14429784-0-image-a-34_1559782669193.jpg) **Lottie Moss turns heads as she exhibits her cleavage in a white crop top and chic powder pink suit at restaurant launch** Stunning  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/04/14432284-0-image-a-29_1559790320902.jpg) **Hilary Duff cradles her sweet baby daughter Banks, seven months, as she rocks a casual look during errands run in Los Angeles** Out and about  
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/13/14399700-0-image-m-66_1559736168041.jpg) **Perrie Edwards PICTURE EXCLUSIVE: Bikini-clad star helps Liverpool ace beau Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain celebrate victory in VERY steamy style**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/05/12/14399432-0-image-a-11_1559735813773.jpg) **Kelly Brook looks every inch the blushing bride in a lace gown and veil as she teases snaps from her cameo on Midsomer Murders**
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/00/14426256-0-image-a-62_1559777092154.jpg) **Idris Elba's new wife  Sabrina Dhowre cuts a glamorous figure in a red silk dress as the couple lead stars at British Vogue bash ** Cute couple 
          * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7) ![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/06/01/14427726-0-image-a-46_1559780826071.jpg) **Brooklyn Beckham's girlfriend Hana Cross lands global beauty brand deal... as David 'advises son to have a serious think about his turbulent relationship'**
        

![iPhone App

Promo](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/promoboxes/iphone_ad_308x111.jpg)

Advertisement

### GADGET REVIEWS

iPad Pro review: Apple takes the tablet to new heights (at a price)

Apple's new iPad is blazingly fast, gorgeous to look at, and quite simply the
best tablet out there - and for a lot of people, probably the best computer
out there.

        
                  * 43 comments 
          * 1 video
        

The small smart display with big potential: Google Home Hub review

Google is late to the game with its Home Hub, but the low price and AI
features make it a great choice for controlling your home, showing pictures
and even helping run your life.

        
                  * 1 comment 
          * 2 videos
        

'Good enough for most people': iPhone XR review

On one hand, the XR lacks the high-resolution screen and dual-lens camera on
the XS. but it is $250 cheaper and still get most of the other cutting-edge
features found on the more expensive model.

        
                  * 199 comments 
          * 1 video
        

The Pixel 3 outsmarts the iPhone (IF you trust Google with all your
information)

AI seems to permeate every part of its software, from the ability to answer
calls for you to being able to almost perfectly predict your morning commute.

        
                  * comments 
          * 1 video
        

Bigger and better in every way: Apple's XS really does take the iPhone to the
Max

Apple's new iPhone XS and XS Max go on sale on Friday - and the biggest
handset Apple has ever made is also its best (and possibly unsurprisingly, its
most expensive).

        
                  * 17 comments 
          * 1 video
        

The $250 beauty device that works like 'Photoshop for your face'

Israeli beauty-tech firm Pollogen has launched its Geneo Personal device,
which stimulates oxygen from beneath the skin's surface to give you a clearer,
fresher face within minutes.

        
                  * 19 comments 
          * 1 video
        

iOS 12 review: The update that really will improve your iPhone

Rather than cram in a plethora of new features, Apple's latest update is about
boosting stability, with improvements in everything from FaceID and battery
life.

        
                  * 208 comments 
          * 2 videos
        

Naim Atom: The hifi that will change the way you listen to music

It's eye-wateringly expensive at $2,999, but Naim's Uniti Atom is a
revelation, an integrated amplifier than makes it easy to stream music at a
quality you've probably never heard before.

        
                  * comments
        

The $1,000 wireless speaker that really IS worth the price: Naim Mu-so Qb
review

Naim's incredible Mu-So Qb takes you back to the good old days - where the
music captivates and enthralls, rather that simply being something in the
background.

        
                  * comments 
          * 1 video
        

The hi-tech $2,000 spin bike that really could change your life

Peloton's hi-tech bike lets you stream live and on demand rides to your home -
and it's one of the best examples of fitness technology out there - at a
price.

        
                  * comments 
          * 1 video
        

The best all in one wireless speaker you'll ever hear: Naim Mu-so review

It might not be a name familiar to the US market, but Naim is a legendary
British brand hoping to make a splash with the American launch of its $1499
Mu:So speaker.

        
                  * 3 comments 
          * 1 video
        

![Michael

Hanlon](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/blogs/bn_michaelhanlon_308x76.jpg)

Advertisement

## Next story

![](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/1s/2019/06/07/01/14479900-0-image-a-13_1559866469274.jpg)
Shock as Labour squeak by in Peterborough by-election - but with less than a
third of a vote - giving a chilling glimpse of Corbyn at No10 if Tories flunk
Brexit and have to fight Farage in election

        
                  * 1.4k comments 
          * 9 videos
        

NEW ARTICLESHomeTop

Share

        
                  * Back to top
        
          * Home
          * News
          * U.S.
          * Sport
          * TV&Showbiz
          * Australia
          * Femail
          * Health
          * Science
          * Money
          * Video
          * Travel
          * DailyMailTV
        

Sitemap Archive Video Archive Topics Index Mobile Apps Screensaver RSS Text-
based site Reader Prints Our Papers Top of page  
Daily Mail Mail on Sunday This is Money  
Metro Jobsite Mail Travel Zoopla.co.uk Prime Location Discount Codes Betting

Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd

Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group

(C) dmg media Contact us How to complain Leadership Team Advertise with us
Contributors Terms Privacy policy & cookies ![Cookie regulation

logo](https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/furniture/misc/logo_cookie_reg.png)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

| |  
---|---|---  
|

|  
| |

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

