

Skip to main content

        
                  * sign up for newsletters
          * Home
          * News
            * Senate
            * House
            * Campaign
            * Administration
            * Business
            * Regulation
            * Media
            * Briefing Room
            * State Watch
            * Latino
            * Polls
            * 12:30 Report
            * Politics 101
            * Floor Action
            * In The Know
            * Sunday Talk Shows
          * Policy
            * Defense
            * Energy & Environment
            * Finance
            * Healthcare
            * Technology
            * Transportation
            * International
            * Cybersecurity
            * National Security
          * Regulation
            * Defense
            * Energy & Environment
            * Finance
            * Healthcare
            * Technology
            * Transportation
            * International
            * Cybersecurity
            * National Security
          * Opinion
            * Contributors
            * Columnists
            * Become a contributor
            * Congress Blog
          * Hill.TV
          * Video
            * Campaign
            * Defense
            * Energy & Environment
            * Finance
            * Healthcare
            * Technology
            * Transportation
            * International
            * Cybersecurity
            * National Security
            * Sunday Shows
            * Events
            * Lawmaker Interviews
          * Podcasts
            * HillCast
            * HistoryCast
          * Events
            * Upcoming Events
            * Past Events
            * About
          * People
          * Campaign
        

Follow Us

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn

TheHill.com

(C) 1996-2019 News Communication

        
                  * Terms & Conditions
          * Privacy Policy
        

## Top menu

        
                  * News
        
            * Senate
            * House
            * Administration
            * Campaign
            * Business
            * Regulation
            * Media
            * Briefing Room
            * State Watch
            * Latino
            * Polls
            * 12:30 Report
            * Politics 101
            * Floor Action
            * In The Know
            * Sunday Talk Shows
        
          * Policy
        
            * Defense
            * Energy & Environment
            * Finance
            * Healthcare
            * Technology
            * Transportation
            * International
            * Cybersecurity
            * National Security
        
          * Opinion
        
            * Columnists
            * Congress Blog
        

All Contributors

        
                    * - Campaign
            * - Civil Rights
            * - Criminal Justice
            * - Education
            * - Energy & Environment
            * - Finance
            * - Healthcare
            * - Immigration
            * - International
            * - Judiciary
            * - Technology
            * - White House
            * - Become A Contributor
        
          * Events
        
            * Upcoming Events
            * About
        
          * Jobs
          * HILL.TV
        

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn

## Search form

Search

## TRENDING:

        
                  * Donald Trump
          * Trump tariffs
          * Hyde Amendment
          * D-Day
        

## SPONSORED:

        
                  * Iran: The Untold Story
        

![TheHill.com](/sites/all/themes/thehill/images/redesign/thehill-logo-big.png)

# Poll: Record number of Americans believe in man-made climate change

By Justin Wise - 07/11/18 12:20 PM EDT

![Poll: Record number of Americans believe in man-made climate

change](https://thehill.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumb_small_article/public/article_images/milanfountainheat08202015getty.jpg?itok=uKj-

TI01)

(C) Getty Images

A record number of Americans believe that global warming is real and that
humans are at least partially responsible, according to a new poll from the
University of Michigan's Center for Local, State, and Urban Policy.

The survey says that 60 percent of respondents say that global warming is
taking place and that human activity is either primarily or partially why
temperatures are rising. That passes a previous high of 58 percent, which was
recorded in 2008, 2009 and 2017.

Thirty-four percent of respondents said that humans were primarily responsible
for global warming, while 26 percent said human activity was partially
responsible.

ADVERTISEMENT

On the other hand, 12 percent of respondents said that climate change was
caused by natural patterns, with another 12 percent saying they weren't sure
if it is occurring at all. Fifteen percent of respondents said the climate is
not changing.

In addition, the poll found that more Americans believe there is solid
evidence of global warming than at any time since 2008. Seventy-three percent
of respondents agreed with the statement.

There is a stark divide along party lines, with 50 percent of Republicans
saying they believe there is solid evidence of global warming, compared to 90
percent of Democrats. The divide is the largest since 2008.

The survey was conducted from April 29 to May 25 among a population of 751
adults. The margin of error is 4 percentage points.

View the discussion thread.

## Most Popular

## Video

![](https://thehill.com/sites/default/files/styles/leading_video/public/levinandy_111518gn_lead.jpg?itok=Ng59ivaX)

Democratic rep says labor unions don't have to be in conflict with technology

Rising

![](https://thehill.com/sites/default/files/styles/leading_video/public/trumpdonald_052519getty_0.jpg?itok=X64LG7sN)

Political historian: 'I don't believe that you should base impeachment upon
politics'

Rising

![](https://thehill.com/sites/default/files/styles/leading_video/public/hickshope_022118getty.jpg?itok=WSwMo6xw)

Poll: 74 percent of Americans say former Trump officials should obey
congressional subpoenas

What America's Thinking

![](https://thehill.com/sites/default/files/styles/leading_video/public/new-

impeachment.jpg?itok=Rg1gO82x)

Poll: 35 percent of voters say Democrats should start impeachment proceedings

What America's Thinking

## More From The Web

Don't miss a brief. Sign up for our daily email.

Your Email

![TheHill.com](/sites/all/themes/thehill/images/redesign/thehill-logo-

footer.png)

## News

        
                  * Senate
          * House
          * Campaign
          * Administration
          * Regulation
          * Media
          * Briefing Room
          * Latino
          * Polls
          * 12:30 Report
          * Floor Action
          * In The Know
          * Sunday Talk Shows
          * More
        

## Policy

        
                  * Defense
          * Energy & Environment
          * Finance
          * Healthcare
          * Technology
          * International
          * Transportation
          * Cybersecurity
          * National Security
          * More
        

## Video

        
                  * Latest
          * Defense
          * Energy & Environment
          * Finance
          * Healthcare
          * Technology
          * Transportation
          * International
          * Cybersecurity
          * National Security
          * Sunday Shows
          * Events
          * More
        

## Opinion

        
                  * Brent Budowsky
          * Columnists
          * Congress Blog
          * Contributors
          * More
        

## TheHill.com

        
                  * Privacy Policy
          * Terms & Conditions
          * Contact
          * Subscriptions
          * Advertise
        

## Resources

        
                  * The Hill Apps
          * People
          * RSS
        

## Contributors

        
                  * Become a Contributor
        

## Other Areas

        
                  * Special Reports
          * Galleries
          * Classifieds
          * Jobs
        

The Hill 1625 K Street, NW Suite 900 Washington DC 20006 | 202-628-8500 tel |
202-628-8503 fax

The contents of this site are (C)2019 Capitol Hill Publishing Corp., a
subsidiary of News Communications, Inc.

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=10314615&c3=&c4=https://thehill.com/policy/energy-

environment/396487-poll-record-number-of-americans-believe-in-man-made-

climate-change&c5=&c6=&c15=&cv=2.0&cj=1)

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-51dZx4IkAE4Zk.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

