

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

        
                  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/28977)
          * Skip to main content
          * Skip to navigation
          * Resources
          * How To
          * About NCBI Accesskeys
        

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PMC

US National Library of Medicine  
National Institutes of Health

Search databasePMCAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarCloneConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarESTGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO
ProfilesGSSGTRHomoloGeneIdentical Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

        
                  * Advanced
          * Journal list
          * Help
        
          * Journal List
          * HHS Author Manuscripts
          * PMC4144270
        

![Logo of nihpa](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/logo-hhspa.png)

EXS. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 Aug 26.

Published in final edited form as:

EXS. 2012; 101: 133–164.

doi: 10.1007/978-3-7643-8340-4_6

PMCID: PMC4144270

NIHMSID: NIHMS414261

PMID: 22945569

# Heavy Metals Toxicity and the Environment

Paul B Tchounwou,* Clement G Yedjou, Anita K Patlolla, and Dwayne J Sutton

Author information Copyright and License information Disclaimer

NIH-RCMI Center for Environmental Health, College of Science, Engineering and
Technology, Jackson State University, 1400 Lynch Street, Box 18750, Jackson,
MS 39217, USA

*Correspondence to Paul B. Tchounwou. ude.smusj@uownuohct.b.luap, Tel: 601-979-0777 Fax: 601-979-0570

Copyright notice

See other articles in PMC that cite the published article.

## Abstract

Heavy metals are naturally occurring elements that have a high atomic weight
and a density at least 5 times greater than that of water. Their multiple
industrial, domestic, agricultural, medical and technological applications
have led to their wide distribution in the environment; raising concerns over
their potential effects on human health and the environment. Their toxicity
depends on several factors including the dose, route of exposure, and chemical
species, as well as the age, gender, genetics, and nutritional status of
exposed individuals. Because of their high degree of toxicity, arsenic,
cadmium, chromium, lead, and mercury rank among the priority metals that are
of public health significance. These metallic elements are considered systemic
toxicants that are known to induce multiple organ damage, even at lower levels
of exposure. They are also classified as human carcinogens (known or probable)
according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and the International
Agency for Research on Cancer. This review provides an analysis of their
environmental occurrence, production and use, potential for human exposure,
and molecular mechanisms of toxicity, genotoxicity, and carcinogenicity.

**Keywords:** Heavy metals, production and use, human exposure, toxicity,
genotoxicity, carcinogenicity

## Introduction

Heavy metals are defined as metallic elements that have a relatively high
density compared to water [1]. With the assumption that heaviness and toxicity
are inter-related, heavy metals also include metalloids, such as arsenic, that
are able to induce toxicity at low level of exposure [2]. In recent years,
there has been an increasing ecological and global public health concern
associated with environmental contamination by these metals. Also, human
exposure has risen dramatically as a result of an exponential increase of
their use in several industrial, agricultural, domestic and technological
applications [3]. Reported sources of heavy metals in the environment include
geogenic, industrial, agricultural, pharmaceutical, domestic effluents, and
atmospheric sources [4]. Environmental pollution is very prominent in point
source areas such as mining, foundries and smelters, and other metal-based
industrial operations [1, 3, 4].

Although heavy metals are naturally occurring elements that are found
throughout the earth's crust, most environmental contamination and human
exposure result from anthropogenic activities such as mining and smelting
operations, industrial production and use, and domestic and agricultural use
of metals and metal-containing compounds [4-7]. Environmental contamination
can also occur through metal corrosion, atmospheric deposition, soil erosion
of metal ions and leaching of heavy metals, sediment re-suspension and metal
evaporation from water resources to soil and ground water [8]. Natural
phenomena such as weathering and volcanic eruptions have also been reported to
significantly contribute to heavy metal pollution [1, 3, 4, 7, 8]. Industrial
sources include metal processing in refineries, coal burning in power plants,
petroleum combustion, nuclear power stations and high tension lines, plastics,
textiles, microelectronics, wood preservation and paper processing plants
[9-11].

It has been reported that metals such as cobalt (Co), copper (Cu), chromium
(Cr), iron (Fe), magnesium (Mg), manganese (Mn), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni),
selenium (Se) and zinc (Zn) are essential nutrients that are required for
various biochemical and physiological functions [12]. Inadequate supply of
these micro-nutrients results in a variety of deficiency diseases or syndromes
[12].

Heavy metals are also considered as trace elements because of their presence
in trace concentrations (ppb range to less than 10ppm) in various
environmental matrices [13]. Their bioavailability is influenced by physical
factors such as temperature, phase association, adsorption and sequestration.
It is also affected by chemical factors that influence speciation at
thermodynamic equilibrium, complexation kinetics, lipid solubility and
octanol/water partition coefficients [14]. Biological factors such as species
characteristics, trophic interactions, and biochemical/physiological
adaptation, also play an important role [15].

The essential heavy metals exert biochemical and physiological functions in
plants and animals. They are important constituents of several key enzymes and
play important roles in various oxidation-reduction reactions [12]. Copper for
example serves as an essential co-factor for several oxidative stress-related
enzymes including catalase, superoxide dismutase, peroxidase, cytochrome c
oxidases, ferroxidases, monoamine oxidase, and dopamine β-monooxygenase
[16-18]. Hence, it is an essential nutrient that is incorporated into a number
of metalloenzymes involved in hemoglobin formation, carbohydrate metabolism,
catecholamine biosynthesis, and cross-linking of collagen, elastin, and hair
keratin. The ability of copper to cycle between an oxidized state, Cu(II), and
reduced state, Cu(I), is used by cuproenzymes involved in redox reactions
[16-18]. However, it is this property of copper that also makes it potentially
toxic because the transitions between Cu(II) and Cu(I) can result in the
generation of superoxide and hydroxyl radicals [16-19]. Also, excessive
exposure to copper has been linked to cellular damage leading to Wilson
disease in humans [18, 19]. Similar to copper, several other essential
elements are required for biologic functioning, however, an excess amount of
such metals produces cellular and tissue damage leading to a variety of
adverse effects and human diseases. For some including chromium and copper,
there is a very narrow range of concentrations between beneficial and toxic
effects [19, 20]. Other metals such as aluminium (Al), antinomy (Sb), arsenic
(As), barium (Ba), beryllium (Be), bismuth (Bi), cadmium (Cd), gallium (Ga),
germanium (Ge), gold (Au), indium (In), lead (Pb), lithium (Li), mercury (Hg),
nickel (Ni), platinum (Pt), silver (Ag), strontium (Sr), tellurium (Te),
thallium (Tl), tin (Sn), titanium (Ti), vanadium (V) and uranium (U) have no
established biological functions and are considered as non-essential metals
[20].

In biological systems, heavy metals have been reported to affect cellular
organelles and components such as cell membrane, mitochondrial, lysosome,
endoplasmic reticulum, nuclei, and some enzymes involved in metabolism,
detoxification, and damage repair [21]. Metal ions have been found to interact
with cell components such as DNA and nuclear proteins, causing DNA damage and
conformational changes that may lead to cell cycle modulation, carcinogenesis
or apoptosis [20-22]. Several studies from our laboratory have demonstrated
that reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and oxidative stress play a key
role in the toxicity and carcinogenicity of metals such as arsenic [23, 24,
25], cadmium [26], chromium [27, 28], lead [29, 30], and mercury [31, 32].
Because of their high degree of toxicity, these five elements rank among the
priority metals that are of great public health significance. They are all
systemic toxicants that are known to induce multiple organ damage, even at
lower levels of exposure. According to the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (U.S. EPA), and the International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC), these metals are also classified as either "known" or
"probable" human carcinogens based on epidemiological and experimental studies
showing an association between exposure and cancer incidence in humans and
animals.

Heavy metal-induced toxicity and carcinogenicity involves many mechanistic
aspects, some of which are not clearly elucidated or understood. However, each
metal is known to have unique features and physic-chemical properties that
confer to its specific toxicological mechanisms of action. This review
provides an analysis of the environmental occurrence, production and use,
potential for human exposure, and molecular mechanisms of toxicity,
genotoxicity, and carcinogenicity of arsenic, cadmium, chromium, lead, and
mercury.

## Arsenic

### Environmental Occurrence, Industrial Production and Use

Arsenic is a ubiquitous element that is detected at low concentrations in
virtually all environmental matrices [33]. The major inorganic forms of
arsenic include the trivalent arsenite and the pentavalent arsenate. The
organic forms are the methylated metabolites - monomethylarsonic acid (MMA),
dimethylarsinic acid (DMA) and trimethylarsine oxide. Environmental pollution
by arsenic occurs as a result of natural phenomena such as volcanic eruptions
and soil erosion, and anthropogenic activities [33]. Several arsenic-
containing compounds are produced industrially, and have been used to
manufacture products with agricultural applications such as insecticides,
herbicides, fungicides, algicides, sheep dips, wood preservatives, and dye-
stuffs. They have also been used in veterinary medicine for the eradication of
tapeworms in sheep and cattle [34]. Arsenic compounds have also been used in
the medical field for at least a century in the treatment of syphilis, yaws,
amoebic dysentery, and trypanosomaiasis [34,35]. Arsenic-based drugs are still
used in treating certain tropical diseases such as African sleeping sickness
and amoebic dysentery, and in veterinary medicine to treat parasitic diseases,
including filariasis in dogs and black head in turkeys and chickens [35].
Recently, arsenic trioxide has been approved by the Food and Drug
Administration as an anticancer agent in the treatment of acute promeylocytic
leukemia [36]. Its therapeutic action has been attributed to the induction of
programmed cell death (apoptosis) in leukemia cells [24].

### Potential for Human Exposure

It is estimated that several million people are exposed to arsenic chronically
throughout the world, especially in countries like Bangladesh, India, Chile,
Uruguay, Mexico, Taiwan, where the ground water is contaminated with high
concentrations of arsenic. Exposure to arsenic occurs via the oral route
(ingestion), inhalation, dermal contact, and the parenteral route to some
extent [33,34,37]. Arsenic concentrations in air range from 1 to 3 ng/m3 in
remote locations (away from human releases), and from 20 to 100 ng/m3 in
cities. Its water concentration is usually less than 10µg/L, although higher
levels can occur near natural mineral deposits or mining sites. Its
concentration in various foods ranges from 20 to 140 ng/kg [38]. Natural
levels of arsenic in soil usually range from 1 to 40 mg/kg, but pesticide
application or waste disposal can produce much higher values [25].

Diet, for most individuals, is the largest source of exposure, with an average
intake of about 50 µg per day. Intake from air, water and soil are usually
much smaller, but exposure from these media may become significant in areas of
arsenic contamination. Workers who produce or use arsenic compounds in such
occupations as vineyards, ceramics, glass-making, smelting, refining of
metallic ores, pesticide manufacturing and application, wood preservation,
semiconductor manufacturing can be exposed to substantially higher levels of
arsenic [39]. Arsenic has also been identified at 781 sites of the 1,300
hazardous waste sites that have been proposed by the U.S. EPA for inclusion on
the national priority list [33,39]. Human exposure at these sites may occur by
a variety of pathways, including inhalation of dusts in air, ingestion of
contaminated water or soil, or through the food chain [40].

Contamination with high levels of arsenic is of concern because arsenic can
cause a number of human health effects. Several epidemiological studies have
reported a strong association between arsenic exposure and increased risks of
both carcinogenic and systemic health effects [41]. Interest in the toxicity
of arsenic has been heightened by recent reports of large populations in West
Bengal, Bangladesh, Thailand, Inner Mongolia, Taiwan, China, Mexico,
Argentina, Chile, Finland and Hungary that have been exposed to high
concentrations of arsenic in their drinking water and are displaying various
clinico-pathological conditions including cardiovascular and peripheral
vascular disease, developmental anomalies, neurologic and neurobehavioural
disorders, diabetes, hearing loss, portal fibrosis, hematologic disorders
(anemia, leukopenia and eosinophilia) and carcinoma [25, 33, 35, 39]. Arsenic
exposure affects virtually all organ systems including the cardiovascular,
dermatologic, nervous, hepatobilliary, renal, gastro-intestinal, and
respiratory systems [41]. Research has also pointed to significantly higher
standardized mortality rates for cancers of the bladder, kidney, skin, and
liver in many areas of arsenic pollution. The severity of adverse health
effects is related to the chemical form of arsenic, and is also time- and
dose-dependent [42,43]. Although the evidence of carcinogenicity of arsenic in
humans seems strong, the mechanism by which it produces tumors in humans is
not completely understood [44].

### Mechanisms of Toxicity and Carcinogenicity

Analyzing the toxic effects of arsenic is complicated because the toxicity is
highly influenced by its oxidation state and solubility, as well as many other
intrinsic and extrinsic factors [45]. Several studies have indicated that the
toxicity of arsenic depends on the exposure dose, frequency and duration, the
biological species, age, and gender, as well as on individual
susceptibilities, genetic and nutritional factors [46]. Most cases of human
toxicity from arsenic have been associated with exposure to inorganic arsenic.
Inorganic trivalent arsenite (AsIII) is 2-10 times more toxic than pentavalent
arsenate (AsV) [5]. By binding to thiol or sulfhydryl groups on proteins, As
(III) can inactivate over 200 enzymes. This is the likely mechanism
responsible for arsenic's widespread effects on different organ systems. As
(V) can replace phosphate, which is involved in many biochemical pathways [5,
47].

One of the mechanisms by which arsenic exerts its toxic effect is through
impairment of cellular respiration by the inhibition of various mitochondrial
enzymes, and the uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation. Most toxicity of
arsenic results from its ability to interact with sulfhydryl groups of
proteins and enzymes, and to substitute phosphorous in a variety of
biochemical reactions [48]. Arsenic _in vitro_ reacts with protein sulfhydryl
groups to inactivate enzymes, such as dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase and
thiolase, thereby producing inhibited oxidation of pyruvate and betaoxidation
of fatty acids [49]. The major metabolic pathway for inorganic arsenic in
humans is methylation. Arsenic trioxide is methylated to two major metabolites
via a non-enzymatic process to monomethylarsonic acid (MMA), which is further
methylated enzymatically to dimethyl arsenic acid (DMA) before excretion in
the urine [40, 47]. It was previously thought that this methylation process is
a pathway of arsenic detoxification, however, recent studies have pointed out
that some methylated metabolites may be more toxic than arsenite if they
contain trivalent forms of arsenic [41].

Tests for genotoxicity have indicated that arsenic compounds inhibit DNA
repair, and induce chromosomal aberrations, sister-chromatid exchanges, and
micronuclei formation in both human and rodent cells in culture [50-52] and in
cells of exposed humans [53]. Reversion assays with _Salmonella typhimurium_
fail to detect mutations that are induced by arsenic compounds. Although
arsenic compounds are generally perceived as weak mutagens in bacterial and
animal cells, they exhibit clastogenic properties in many cell types _in vivo_
and _in vitro_ [54]. In the absence of animal models, _in vitro_ cell
transformation studies become a useful means of obtaining information on the
carcinogenic mechanisms of arsenic toxicity. Arsenic and arsenical compounds
are cytotoxic and induce morphological transformations of Syrian hamster
embryo (SHE) cells as well as mouse C3H10T1/2 cells and BALB/3T3 cells [55,
56].

Based on the comet assay, it has been reported that arsenic trioxide induces
DNA damage in human lymphophytes [57] and also in mice leukocytes [58].
Arsenic compounds have also been shown to induce gene amplification, arrest
cells in mitosis, inhibit DNA repair, and induce expression of the _c-fos_
gene and the oxidative stress protein heme oxygenase in mammalian cells [58,
59]. They have been implicated as promoters and comutagens for a variety of
toxic agents [60]. Recent studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that
arsenic trioxide is cytotoxic and able to transcriptionally induce a
significant number of stress genes and related proteins in human liver
carcinoma cells [61].

Epidemiological investigations have indicated that long-term arsenic exposure
results in promotion of carcinogenesis. Several hypotheses have been proposed
to describe the mechanism of arsenic-induced carcinogenesis. Zhao et al. [62]
reported that arsenic may act as a carcinogen by inducing DNA hypomethylation,
which in turn facilitates aberrant gene expression. Additionally, it was found
that arsenic is a potent stimulator of extracellular signal-regulated protein
kinase Erk1 and AP-1 transactivational activity, and an efficient inducer of
_c-fos_ and _c-jun_ gene expression [63]. Induction of _c-jun_ and _c-fos_ by
arsenic is associated with activation of JNK [64]. However, the role of JNK
activation by arsenite in cell transformation or tumor promotion is unclear.

In another study, Trouba et al. [65] concluded that long-term exposure to high
levels of arsenic might make cells more susceptible to mitogenic stimulation
and that alterations in mitogenic signaling proteins might contribute to the
carcinogenic action of arsenic. Collectively, several recent studies have
demonstrated that arsenic can interfere with cell signaling pathways (e.g.,
the p53 signaling pathway) that are frequently implicated in the promotion and
progression of a variety of tumor types in experimental animal models, and of
some human tumors [66, 68]. However, the specific alterations in signal
transduction pathways or the actual targets that contribute to the development
of arsenic-induced tumors in humans following chronic consumption of arsenic
remains uncertain.

Recent clinical trials have found that arsenic trioxide has therapeutic value
in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia, and there is interest in
exploring its effectiveness in the treatment of a variety of other cancers
[69,70]. In acute promyelocytic leukemia, the specific molecular event
critical to the formation of malignant cells is known. A study by Puccetti et
al. [71] found that forced overexpression of BCR-ABL susceptibility in human
lymphoblasts cells resulted in greatly enhanced sensitivity to arsenic-induced
apoptosis. They also concluded that arsenic trioxide is a tumor specific agent
capable of inducing apoptosis selectively in acute promyelocytic leukemia
cells. Several recent studies have shown that arsenic can induce apoptosis
through alterations in other cell signaling pathways [72,73]. In addition to
acute peomyelocytic leukemia, arsenic is thought to have therapeutic potential
for myeloma [74]. In summary, numerous cancer chemotherapy studies in cell
cultures and in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia demonstrate that
arsenic trioxide administration can lead to cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in
malignant cells.

Previous studies have also examined p53 gene expression and mutation in tumors
obtained from subjects with a history of arsenic ingestion. p53 participates
in many cellular functions, cell-cycle control, DNA repair, differentiation,
genomic plasticity and programmed cell death. Additional support for the
hypothesis that arsenic can modulate gene expression has been provided by
several different studies [75,76]. Collectively, these studies provide further
evidence that various forms of arsenic can alter gene expression and that such
changes could contribute substantially to the toxic and carcinogenic actions
of arsenic treatment in human populations [77].

Several _in vitro_ studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that arsenic
modulates DNA synthesis, gene and protein expression, genotoxicity, mitosis
and/or apoptotic mechanisms in various cell lines including keratinocytes,
melanocytes, dendritic cells, dermal fibroblasts, microvascular endothelial
cells, monocytes, and T-cells [78], colon cancer cells [79], lung cancer cells
[80], human leukemia cells [81], Jurkat-T lymphocytes [82], and human liver
carcinoma cells [83]. We have also shown that oxidative stress plays a key
role in arsenic induced cytotoxicity, a process that is modulated by pro-
and/or anti-oxidants such as ascorbic acid and n-acetyl cysteine [84-86]. We
have further demonstrated that the toxicity of arsenic depends on its chemical
form, the inorganic form being more toxic than the organic one [42].

Various hypotheses have been proposed to explain the carcinogenicity of
inorganic arsenic. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms by which this
arsenical induces cancer are still poorly understood. Results of previous
studies have indicated that inorganic arsenic does not act through classic
genotoxic and mutagenic mechanisms, but rather may be a tumor promoter that
modifies signal transduction pathways involved in cell growth and
proliferation [68]. Although much progress has been recently made in the area
of arsenic's possible mode(s) of carcinogenic action, a scientific consensus
has not yet reached. A recent review discusses nine different possible modes
of action of arsenic carcinogenesis: induced chromosomal abnormalities,
oxidative stress, altered DNA repair, altered DNA methylation patterns,
altered growth factors, enhanced cell proliferation, promotion/progression,
suppression of p53, and gene amplification [87]. Presently, three modes
(chromosomal abnormality, oxidative stress, and altered growth factors) of
arsenic carcinogenesis have shown a degree of positive evidence, both in
experimental systems (animal and human cells) and in human tissues. The
remaining possible modes of carcinogenic action (progression of
carcinogenesis, altered DNA repair, p53 suppression, altered DNA methylation
patterns and gene amplification) do not have as much evidence, particularly
from _in vivo_ studies with laboratory animals, _in vitro_ studies with
cultured human cells, or human data from case or population studies. Thus, the
mode-of-action studies suggest that arsenic might be acting as a cocarcinogen,
a promoter, or a progressor of carcinogenesis.

## Cadmium

### Environmental Occurrence, Industrial Production and Use

Cadmium is a heavy metal of considerable environmental and occupational
concern. It is widely distributed in the earth's crust at an average
concentration of about 0.1 mg/kg. The highest level of cadmium compounds in
the environment is accumulated in sedimentary rocks, and marine phosphates
contain about 15 mg cadmium/kg [88].

Cadmium is frequently used in various industrial activities. The major
industrial applications of cadmium include the production of alloys, pigments,
and batteries [89]. Although the use of cadmium in batteries has shown
considerable growth in recent years, its commercial use has declined in
developed countries in response to environmental concerns. In the United
States for example, the daily cadmium intake is about 0.4µg/kg/day, less than
half of the U.S. EPA's oral reference dose [90]. This decline has been linked
to the introduction of stringent effluent limits from plating works and, more
recently, to the introduction of general restrictions on cadmium consumption
in certain countries.

### Potential for Human Exposure

The main routes of exposure to cadmium are via inhalation or cigarette smoke,
and ingestion of food. Skin absorption is rare. Human exposure to cadmium is
possible through a number of several sources including employment in primary
metal industries, eating contaminated food, smoking cigarettes, and working in
cadmium-contaminated work places, with smoking being a major contributor [91,
92]. Other sources of cadmium include emissions from industrial activities,
including mining, smelting, and manufacturing of batteries, pigments,
stabilizers, and alloys [93]. Cadmium is also present in trace amounts in
certain foods such as leafy vegetables, potatoes, grains and seeds, liver and
kidney, and crustaceans and mollusks [94]. In addition, foodstuffs that are
rich in cadmium can greatly increase the cadmium concentration in human
bodies. Examples are liver, mushrooms, shellfish, mussels, cocoa powder and
dried seaweed. An important distribution route is the circulatory system
whereas blood vessels are considered to be main stream organs of cadmium
toxicity. Chronic inhalation exposure to cadmium particulates is generally
associated with changes in pulmonary function and chest radiographs that are
consistent with emphysema [95]. Workplace exposure to airborne cadmium
particulates has been associated with decreases in olfactory function [96].
Several epidemiologic studies have documented an association of chronic low-
level cadmium exposure with decreases in bone mineral density and osteoporosis
[97-99].

Exposure to cadmium is commonly determined by measuring cadmium levels in
blood or urine. Blood cadmium reflects recent cadmium exposure (from smoking,
for example). Cadmium in urine (usually adjusted for dilution by calculating
the cadmium/creatinine ratio) indicates accumulation, or kidney burden of
cadmium [100, 101]. It is estimated that about 2.3% of the U.S. population has
elevated levels of urine cadmium (>2µg/g creatinine), a marker of chronic
exposure and body burden [102]. Blood and urine cadmium levels are typically
higher in cigarette smokers, intermediate in former smokers and lower in
nonsmokers [102, 103]. Because of continuing use of cadmium in industrial
applications, the environmental contamination and human exposure to cadmium
have dramatically increased during the past century [104].

### Molecular Mechanisms of Toxicity and Carcinogenicity

Cadmium is a severe pulmonary and gastrointestinal irritant, which can be
fatal if inhaled or ingested. After acute ingestion, symptoms such as
abdominal pain, burning sensation, nausea, vomiting, salivation, muscle
cramps, vertigo, shock, loss of consciousness and convulsions usually appear
within 15 to 30 min [105]. Acute cadmium ingestion can also cause
gastrointestinal tract erosion, pulmonary, hepatic or renal injury and coma,
depending on the route of poisoning [105, 106]. Chronic exposure to cadmium
has a depressive effect on levels of norepinephrine, serotonin, and
acetylcholine [107]. Rodent studies have shown that chronic inhalation of
cadmium causes pulmonary adenocarcinomas [108, 109]. It can also cause
prostatic proliferative lesions including adenocarcinomas, after systemic or
direct exposure [110].

Although the mechanisms of cadmium toxicity are poorly understood, it has been
speculated that cadmium causes damage to cells primarily through the
generation of ROS [111], which causes single-strand DNA damage and disrupts
the synthesis of nucleic acids and proteins [112]. Studies using two-
dimensional gel electrophoresis have shown that several stress response
systems are expressed in response to cadmium exposure, including those for
heat shock, oxidative stress, stringent response, cold shock, and SOS [113-
115]. _In vitro_ studies indicate that cadmium induces cytotoxic effects at
the concentrations 0.1 to 10 mM and free radical-dependent DNA damage [116,
117]. _In vivo_ studies have shown that cadmium modulates male reproduction in
mice model at a concentration of 1 mg/kg body weight [118]. However, cadmium
is a weak mutagen when compared with other carcinogenic metals [119]. Previous
reports have indicated that cadmium affects signal transduction pathways;
inducing inositol polyphosphate formation, increasing cytosolic free calcium
levels in various cell types [120], and blocking calcium channels [121, 122].
At lower concentrations (1-100 µM), cadmium binds to proteins, decreases DNA
repair [123], activates protein degradation, up-regulates cytokines and proto-
oncogenes such as c- _fos_ , c- _jun_ , and c- _myc_ [124], and induces
expression of several genes including metallothioneins [125], heme oxygenases,
glutathione transferases, heat-shock proteins, acute-phase reactants, and DNA
polymerase β [126].

Cadmium compounds are classified as human carcinogens by several regulatory
agencies. The International Agency for Research on Cancer [91] and the U.S.
National Toxicology Program have concluded that there is adequate evidence
that cadmium is a human carcinogen. This designation as a human carcinogen is
based primarily on repeated findings of an association between occupational
cadmium exposure and lung cancer, as well as on very strong rodent data
showing the pulmonary system as a target site [91]. Thus, the lung is the most
definitively established site of human carcinogenesis from cadmium exposure.
Other target tissues of cadmium carcinogenesis in animals include injection
sites, adrenals, testes, and the hemopoietic system [91, 108, 109]. In some
studies, occupational or environmental cadmium exposure has also been
associated with development of cancers of the prostate, kidney, liver,
hematopoietic system and stomach [108, 109]. Carcinogenic metals including
arsenic, cadmium, chromium, and nickel have all been associated with DNA
damage through base pair mutation, deletion, or oxygen radical attack on DNA
[126]. Animal studies have demonstrated reproductive and teratogenic effects.
Small epidemiologic studies have noted an inverse relationship between cadmium
in cord blood, maternal blood or maternal urine and birth weight and length at
birth [127, 128].

## Chromium

### Environmental Occurrence, Industrial Production and Use

Chromium (Cr) is a naturally occurring element present in the earth's crust,
with oxidation states (or valence states) ranging from chromium (II) to
chromium (VI) [129]. Chromium compounds are stable in the trivalent [Cr(III)]
form and occur in nature in this state in ores, such as ferrochromite. The
hexavalent [Cr(VI)] form is the second-most stable state [28]. Elemental
chromium [Cr(0)] does not occur naturally. Chromium enters into various
environmental matrices (air, water, and soil) from a wide variety of natural
and anthropogenic sources with the largest release coming from industrial
establishments. Industries with the largest contribution to chromium release
include metal processing, tannery facilities, chromate production, stainless
steel welding, and ferrochrome and chrome pigment production. The increase in
the environmental concentrations of chromium has been linked to air and
wastewater release of chromium, mainly from metallurgical, refractory, and
chemical industries. Chromium released into the environment from anthropogenic
activity occurs mainly in the hexavalent form [Cr(VI)] [130]. Hexavalent
chromium [Cr(VI)] is a toxic industrial pollutant that is classified as human
carcinogen by several regulatory and non-regulatory agencies [130-132]. The
health hazard associated with exposure to chromium depends on its oxidation
state, ranging from the low toxicity of the metal form to the high toxicity of
the hexavalent form. All Cr(VI)-containing compounds were once thought to be
man-made, with only Cr(III) naturally ubiquitous in air, water, soil and
biological materials. Recently, however, naturally occurring Cr(VI) has been
found in ground and surface waters at values exceeding the World Health
Organization limit for drinking water of 50 µg of Cr(VI) per liter [133].
Chromium is widely used in numerous industrial processes and as a result, is a
contaminant of many environmental systems [134]. Commercially chromium
compounds are used in industrial welding, chrome plating, dyes and pigments,
leather tanning and wood preservation. Chromium is also used as anticorrosive
in cooking systems and boilers [135, 136].

### Potential for Human Exposure

It is estimated that more than 300,000 workers are exposed annually to
chromium and chromium-containing compounds in the workplace. In humans and
animals, [Cr(III)] is an essential nutrient that plays a role in glucose, fat
and protein metabolism by potentiating the action of insulin [5]. However,
occupational exposure has been a major concern because of the high risk of Cr-
induced diseases in industrial workers occupationally exposed to Cr(VI) [137].
Also, the general human population and some wildlife may also be at risk. It
is estimated that 33 tons of total Cr are released annually into the
environment [130]. The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) recently set a "safe" level of 5µg/m3, for an 8-hr time-weighted
average, even though this revised level may still pose a carcinogenic risk
[138]. For the general human population, atmospheric levels range from 1 to
100 ng/cm3 [139], but can exceed this range in areas that are close to Cr
manufacturing.

Non-occupational exposure occurs via ingestion of chromium containing food and
water whereas occupational exposure occurs via inhalation [140]. Chromium
concentrations range between 1 and 3000 mg/kg in soil, 5 to 800 µg/L in sea
water, and 26 µg/L to 5.2 mg/L in rivers and lakes [129]. Chromium content in
foods varies greatly and depends on the processing and preparation. In
general, most fresh foods typically contain chromium levels ranging from <10
to 1,300 µg/kg. Present day workers in chromium-related industries can be
exposed to chromium concentrations two orders of magnitude higher than the
general population [141]. Even though the principal route of human exposure to
chromium is through inhalation, and the lung is the primary target organ,
significant human exposure to chromium has also been reported to take place
through the skin [142, 143]. For example, the widespread incidence of
dermatitis noticed among construction workers is attributed to their exposure
to chromium present in cement [143]. Occupational and environmental exposure
to Cr(VI)-containing compounds is known to cause multiorgan toxicity such as
renal damage, allergy and asthma, and cancer of the respiratory tract in
humans [5, 144].

Breathing high levels of chromium (VI) can cause irritation to the lining of
the nose, and nose ulcers. The main health problems seen in animals following
ingestion of chromium (VI) compounds are irritation and ulcers in the stomach
and small intestine, anemia, sperm damage and male reproductive system damage.
Chromium (III) compounds are much less toxic and do not appear to cause these
problems. Some individuals are extremely sensitive to chromium(VI) or
chromium(III), allergic reactions consisting of severe redness and swelling of
the skin have been noted. An increase in stomach tumors was observed in humans
and animals exposed to chromium(VI) in drinking water. Accidental or
intentional ingestion of extremely high doses of chromium (VI) compounds by
humans has resulted in severe respiratory, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal,
hematological, hepatic, renal, and neurological effects as part of the
sequelae leading to death or in patients who survived because of medical
treatment [141]. Although the evidence of carcinogenicity of chromium in
humans and terrestrial mammals seems strong, the mechanism by which it causes
cancer is not completely understood [145].

### Mechanisms of Toxicity and Carcinogenicity

Major factors governing the toxicity of chromium compounds are oxidation state
and solubility. Cr(VI) compounds, which are powerful oxidizing agents and thus
tend to be irritating and corrosive, appear to be much more toxic systemically
than Cr(III) compounds, given similar amount and solubility [146, 147].
Although the mechanisms of biological interaction are uncertain, the variation
in toxicity may be related to the ease with which Cr(VI) can pass through cell
membranes and its subsequent intracellular reduction to reactive
intermediates. Since Cr(III) is poorly absorbed by any route, the toxicity of
chromium is mainly attributable to the Cr(VI) form. It can be absorbed by the
lung and gastrointestinal tract, and even to a certain extent by intact skin.
The reduction of Cr(VI) is considered as being a detoxification process when
it occurs at a distance from the target site for toxic or genotoxic effect
while reduction of Cr(VI) may serve to activate chromium toxicity if it takes
place in or near the cell nucleus of target organs [148]. If Cr(VI) is reduced
to Cr(III) extracellularly, this form of the metal is not readily transported
into cells and so toxicity is not observed. The balance that exists between
extracellular Cr(VI) and intracellular Cr(III) is what ultimately dictates the
amount and rate at which Cr(VI) can enter cells and impart its toxic effects
[134].

Cr(VI) enters many types of cells and under physiological conditions can be
reduced by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), glutathione (GSH) reductase, ascorbic
acid, and GSH to produce reactive intermediates, including Cr(V), Cr(IV),
thiylradicals, hydroxyl radicals, and ultimately, Cr(III). Any of these
species could attack DNA, proteins, and membrane lipids, thereby disrupting
cellular integrity and functions [149, 150].

Studies with animal models have also reported many harmful effects of Cr (VI)
on mammals. Subcutaneous administration of Cr (VI) to rats caused severe
progressive proteinuria, urea nitrogen and creatinine, as well as elevation in
serum alanine aminotransferase activity and hepatic lipid peroxide formation
[151]. Similar studies reported by Gumbleton and Nicholls [152] found that Cr
(VI) induced renal damage in rats when administered by single sub-cutaneous
injections. Bagchi et al. demonstrated that rats received Cr (VI) orally in
water induced hepatic mitochondrial and microsomal lipid peroxidation, as well
as enhanced excretion of urinary lipid metabolites including malondialdehyde
[153, 154].

Adverse health effects induced by Cr (VI) have also been reported in humans.
Epidemiological investigations have reported respiratory cancers in workers
occupationally exposed to Cr (VI)-containing compounds [142, 148]. DNA strand
breaks in peripheral lymphocytes and lipid peroxidation products in urine
observed in chromium-exposed workers also support the evidence of Cr
(VI)-induced toxicity to humans [155, 156]. Oxidative damage is considered to
be the underlying cause of these genotoxic effects including chromosomal
abnormalities [157, 158], and DNA strand breaks [159]. Nevertheless, recent
studies indicate a biological relevance of non-oxidative mechanisms in Cr(VI)
carcinogenesis [160].

Carcinogenicity appears to be associated with the inhalation of the less
soluble/insoluble Cr(VI) compounds. The toxicology of Cr(VI) does not reside
with the elemental form. It varies greatly among a wide variety of very
different Cr(VI) compounds [161]. Epidemiological evidence strongly points to
Cr(VI) as the agent in carcinogenesis. Solubility and other characteristics of
chromium, such as size, crystal modification, surface charge, and the ability
to be phagocytized might be important in determining cancer risk [135].

Studies in our laboratory have indicated that chromium (VI) is cytotoxic and
able to induce DNA damaging effects such as chromosomal abnormalities [162],
DNA strand breaks, DNA fragmentation and oxidative stress in Sprague-Dawley
rats and human liver carcinoma cells [27, 28]. Recently, our laboratory has
also demonstrated that chromium (VI) induces biochemical, genotoxic and
histopathologic effects in liver and kidney of goldfish, _carassius auratus_
[163].

Various hypotheses have been proposed to explain the carcinogenicity of
chromium and its salts, however some inherent difficulties exist when
discussing metal carcinogenesis. A metal cannot be classified as carcinogenic
per se since its different compounds may have different potencies. Because of
the multiple chemical exposure in industrial establishments, it is difficult
from an epidemiological standpoint to relate the carcinogenic effect to a
single compound. Thus, the carcinogenic risk must often be related to a
process or to a group of metal compounds rather than to a single substance.
Differences in carcinogenic potential are related not only to different
chemical forms of the same metal but also to the particle size of the inhaled
aerosol and to physical characteristics of the particle such as surface charge
and crystal modification [164].

## Lead

### Environmental Occurrence, Industrial Production and Use

Lead is a naturally occurring bluish-gray metal present in small amounts in
the earth's crust. Although lead occurs naturally in the environment,
anthropogenic activities such as fossil fuels burning, mining, and
manufacturing contribute to the release of high concentrations. Lead has many
different industrial, agricultural and domestic applications. It is currently
used in the production of lead-acid batteries, ammunitions, metal products
(solder and pipes), and devices to shield X-rays. An estimated 1.52 million
metric tons of lead were used for various industrial applications in the
United Stated in 2004. Of that amount, lead-acid batteries production
accounted for 83 percent, and the remaining usage covered a range of products
such as ammunitions (3.5 percent), oxides for paint, glass, pigments and
chemicals (2.6 percent), and sheet lead (1.7 percent) [165, 166].

In recent years, the industrial use of lead has been significantly reduced
from paints and ceramic products, caulking, and pipe solder [167]. Despite
this progress, it has been reported that among 16.4 million United States
homes with more than one child younger than 6 years per household, 25% of
homes still had significant amounts of lead-contaminated deteriorated paint,
dust, or adjacent bare soil [168]. Lead in dust and soil often re-contaminates
cleaned houses [169] and contributes to elevating blood lead concentrations in
children who play on bare, contaminated soil [170]. Today, the largest source
of lead poisoning in children comes from dust and chips from deteriorating
lead paint on interior surfaces [171]. Children who live in homes with
deteriorating lead paint can achieve blood lead concentrations of 20µg/dL or
greater [172].

### Potential for Human Exposure

Exposure to lead occurs mainly via inhalation of lead-contaminated dust
particles or aerosols, and ingestion of lead-contaminated food, water, and
paints [173, 174]. Adults absorb 35 to 50% of lead through drinking water and
the absorption rate for children may be greater than 50%. Lead absorption is
influenced by factors such as age and physiological status. In the human body,
the greatest percentage of lead is taken into the kidney, followed by the
liver and the other soft tissues such as heart and brain, however, the lead in
the skeleton represents the major body fraction [175]. The nervous system is
the most vulnerable target of lead poisoning. Headache, poor attention spam,
irritability, loss of memory and dullness are the early symptoms of the
effects of lead exposure on the central nervous system [170, 173].

Since the late 1970's, lead exposure has decreased significantly as a result
of multiple efforts including the elimination of lead in gasoline, and the
reduction of lead levels in residential paints, food and drink cans, and
plumbing systems [173, 174]. Several federal programs implemented by state and
local health governments have not only focused on banning lead in gasoline,
paint and soldered cans, but have also supported screening programs for lead
poisoning in children and lead abatement in housing [167]. Despite the
progress in these programs, human exposure to lead remains a serious health
problem [176, 177]. Lead is the most systemic toxicant that affects several
organs in the body including the kidneys, liver, central nervous system,
hematopoetic system, endocrine system, and reproductive system [173].

Lead exposure usually results from lead in deteriorating household paints,
lead in the work place, lead in crystals and ceramic containers that leaches
into water and food, lead use in hobbies, and lead use in some traditional
medicines and cosmetics [167, 174]. Several studies conducted by the National
Health and Nutrition Examination surveys (NHANES) have measured blood lead
levels in the U.S. populations and have assessed the magnitude of lead
exposure by age, gender, race, income and degree of urbanization [176].
Although the results of these surveys have demonstrated a general decline in
blood lead levels since the 1970s, they have also shown that large populations
of children continue to have elevated blood lead levels (> 10µg/dL). Hence,
lead poisoning remains one of the most common pediatric health problems in the
United States today [167, 173, 174, 176-179]. Exposure to lead is of special
concern among women particularly during pregnancy. Lead absorbed by the
pregnant mother is readily transferred to the developing fetus [180]. Human
evidence corroborates animal findings [181], linking prenatal exposure to lead
with reduced birth weight and preterm delivery [182], and with neuro-
developmental abnormalities in offspring [183].

### Molecular Mechanisms of Toxicity and Carcinogenicity

There are many published studies that have documented the adverse effects of
lead in children and the adult population. In children, these studies have
shown an association between blood level poisoning and diminished
intelligence, lower intelligence quotient-IQ, delayed or impaired
neurobehavioral development, decreased hearing acuity, speech and language
handicaps, growth retardation, poor attention span, and anti social and
diligent behaviors [178, 179, 184, 185]. In the adult population, reproductive
effects, such as decreased sperm count in men and spontaneous abortions in
women have been associated with high lead exposure [186, 187]. Acute exposure
to lead induces brain damage, kidney damage, and gastrointestinal diseases,
while chronic exposure may cause adverse effects on the blood, central nervous
system, blood pressure, kidneys, and vitamin D metabolism [173, 174, 178, 179,
184-187].

One of the major mechanisms by which lead exerts its toxic effect is through
biochemical processes that include lead's ability to inhibit or mimic the
actions of calcium and to interact with proteins [173]. Within the skeleton,
lead is incorporated into the mineral in place of calcium. Lead binds to
biological molecules and thereby interfering with their function by a number
of mechanisms. Lead binds to sulfhydryl and amide groups of enzymes, altering
their configuration and diminishing their activities. Lead may also compete
with essential metallic cations for binding sites, inhibiting enzyme activity,
or altering the transport of essential cations such as calcium [188]. Many
investigators have demonstrated that lead intoxication induces a cellular
damage mediated by the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [189]. In
addition, Jiun and Hseien [190] demonstrated that the levels of
malondialdehyde (MDA) in blood strongly correlate with lead concentration in
the blood of exposed workers. Other studies showed that the activities of
antioxidant enzymes, including superoxide dismutase (SOD), and glutathione
peroxidase in erythrocytes of workers exposed to lead are remarkably higher
than that in non-exposed workers [191]. A series of recent studies in our
laboratory demonstrated that lead-induced toxicity and apoptosis in human
cancer cells involved several cellular and molecular processes including
induction of cell death and oxidative stress [29, 192], transcriptional
activation of stress genes [30], DNA damage [29], externalization of
phosphatidylserine and activation of caspase-3 [193].

A large body of research has indicated that lead acts by interfering with
calcium-dependent processes related to neuronal signaling and intracellular
signal transduction. Lead perturbs intracellular calcium cycling, altering
releasability of organelle stores, such as endoplasmic reticulum and
mitochondria [194, 195]. In some cases lead inhibits calcium-dependent events,
including calcium-dependent release of several neurotransmitters and receptor-
coupled ionophores in glutamatergic neurons [196]. In other cases lead appears
to augment calcium-dependent events, such as protein kinase C and calmodulin
[194, 197].

Experimental studies have indicated that lead is potentially carcinogenic,
inducing renal tumors in rats and mice [198, 199], and is therefore considered
by the IARC as a probable human carcinogen [200]. Lead exposure is also known
to induce gene mutations and sister chromatid exchanges [201, 202],
morphological transformations in cultured rodent cells [203], and to enhance
anchorage independence in diploid human fibroblasts [204]. _In vitro_ and _in
vivo_ studies indicated that lead compounds cause genetic damage through
various indirect mechanisms that include inhibition of DNA synthesis and
repair, oxidative damage, and interaction with DNA-binding proteins and tumor
suppressor proteins. Studies by Roy and his group showed that lead acetate
induced mutagenicity at a toxic dose at the _E. coli gpt_ locus transfected to
V79 cells [205]. They also reported that toxic doses of lead acetate and lead
nitrate induced DNA breaks at the _E. coli gpt_ locus transfected to V79 cells
[205]. Another study by Wise and his collaborators found no evidence for
direct genotoxic or DNA-damaging effects of lead except for lead chromate.
They pointed out that the genotoxicity may be due to hexavalent chromate
rather than lead [206].

## Mercury

### Environmental Occurrence, Industrial Production and Use

Mercury is a heavy metal belonging to the transition element series of the
periodic table. It is unique in that it exists or is found in nature in three
forms (elemental, inorganic, and organic), with each having its own profile of
toxicity [207]. At room temperature elemental mercury exists as a liquid which
has a high vapor pressure and is released into the environment as mercury
vapor. Mercury also exists as a cation with oxidation states of +1 (mercurous)
or +2 (mercuric) [208]. Methylmercury is the most frequently encountered
compound of the organic form found in the environment, and is formed as a
result of the methylation of inorganic (mercuric) forms of mercury by
microorganisms found in soil and water [209].

Mercury is a widespread environmental toxicant and pollutant which induces
severe alterations in the body tissues and causes a wide range of adverse
health effects [210]. Both humans and animals are exposed to various chemical
forms of mercury in the environment. These include elemental mercury vapor
(Hg0), inorganic mercurous (Hg+1), mercuric (Hg+2), and the organic mercury
compounds [211]. Because mercury is ubiquitous in the environment, humans,
plants and animals are all unable to avoid exposure to some form of mercury
[212].

Mercury is utilized in the electrical industry (switches, thermostats,
batteries), dentistry (dental amalgams), and numerous industrial processes
including the production of caustic soda, in nuclear reactors, as antifungal
agents for wood processing, as a solvent for reactive and precious metal, and
as a preservative of pharmaceutical products [213]. The industrial demand for
mercury peaked in 1964 and began to sharply decline between 1980 and 1994 as a
result of federal bans on mercury additives in paints, pesticides, and the
reduction of its use in batteries [214].

### Potential for Human Exposure

Humans are exposed to all forms of mercury through accidents, environmental
pollution, food contamination, dental care, preventive medical practices,
industrial and agricultural operations, and occupational operations [215]. The
major sources of chronic, low level mercury exposure are dental amalgams and
fish consumption. Mercury enters water as a natural process of off-gassing
from the earth's crust and also through industrial pollution [216]. Algae and
bacteria methylate the mercury entering the waterways. Methyl mercury then
makes its way through the food chain into fish, shellfish, and eventually into
humans [217].

The two most highly absorbed species are elemental mercury (Hg0) and methyl
mercury (MeHg). Dental amalgams contain over 50% elemental mercury [218]. The
elemental vapor is highly lipophilic and is effectively absorbed through the
lungs and tissues lining the mouth. After Hg0 enters the blood, it rapidly
passes through cell membranes, which include both the blood-brain barrier and
the placental barrier [219]. Once it gains entry into the cell, Hg0 is
oxidized and becomes highly reactive Hg2+. Methyl mercury derived from eating
fish is readily absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract and because of its
lipid solubility, can easily cross both the placental and blood-brain
barriers. Once mercury is absorbed it has a very low excretion rate. A major
proportion of what is absorbed accumulates in the kidneys, neurological tissue
and the liver. All forms of mercury are toxic and their effects include
gastrointestinal toxicity, neurotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity [213].

### Molecular Mechanisms of Mercury Toxicity and Carcingenicity

The molecular mechanisms of toxicity of mercury are based on its chemical
activity and biological features which suggest that oxidative stress is
involved in its toxicity [220]. Through oxidative stress mercury has shown
mechanisms of sulfhydryl reactivity. Once in the cell both Hg2+ and MeHg form
covalent bonds with cysteine residues of proteins and deplete cellular
antioxidants. Antioxidant enzymes serve as a line of cellular defense against
mercury compounds [221]. The interaction of mercury compounds suggests the
production of oxidative damage through the accumulation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) which would normally be eliminated by cellular antioxidants.

In eukaryotic organisms the primary site for the production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) occurs in the mitochondria through normal metabolism [222].
Inorganic mercury has been reported to increase the production of these ROS by
causing defects in oxidative phosphorylation and electron transport at the
ubiquinone-cytochrome b5 step [223]. Through the acceleration of the rate of
electron transfer in the electron transport chain in the mitochondria, mercury
induces the premature shedding of electrons to molecular oxygen which causes
an increase in the generation of reactive oxygen species [224].

Oxidative stress appears to also have an effect on calcium homeostasis. The
role of calcium in the activation of proteases, endonucleases and
phospholipases is well established. The activation of phospholipase A2 has
been shown to result in an increase in reactive oxygen species through the
increase generation of arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid has also been shown
to be an important target of reactive oxygen species [225]. Both organic and
inorganic mercury have been shown to alter calcium homeostasis but through
different mechanisms. Organic mercury compounds (MeHg) are believed to
increase intracellular calcium by accelerating the influx of calcium from the
extracellular medium and mobilizing intracellular stores, while inorganic
mercury (Hg2+) compounds increase intracellular calcium stores only through
the influx of calcium from the extracellular medium [226]. Mercury compounds
have also been shown to induce increased levels of MDA in both the livers,
kidneys, lungs and testes of rats treated with HgCl2 [227]. This increase in
concentration was shown to correlate with the severity of hepatotoxicity and
nephrotoxicity [228]. HgCl2-induced lipid peroxidation was shown to be
significantly reduced by antioxidant pretreatment with selenium. Selenium has
been shown to achieve this protective effect through direct binding to mercury
or serving as a cofactor for glutathione peroxidase and facilitating its
ability to scavenge ROS [229]. Vitamin E has also been reported to protect
against HgCl2-induced lipid peroxidation in the liver [230].

Metal-induced carcinogenicity has been a research subject of great public
health interest. Generally, carcinogenesis is considered to have three stages
including initiation, promotion, and progression and metastasis. Although
mutations of DNA, which can activate oncogenesis or inhibit tumor suppression,
were traditionally thought to be crucial factors for the initiation of
carcinogenesis, recent studies have demonstrated that other molecular events
such as transcription activation, signal transduction, oncogene amplification,
and recombination, also constitute significant contributing factors [231,
232]. Studies have shown that mercury and other toxic metals effect cellular
organelles and adversely affect their biologic functions [231, 233].
Accumulating evidence also suggests that ROS play a major role in the
mediation of metal-induced cellular responses and carcinogenesis [234-236].

The connection between mercury exposure and carcinogenesis is very
controversial. While some studies have confirmed its genotoxic potential,
others have not shown an association between mercury exposure and genotoxic
damage [237]. In studies implicating mercury as a genotoxic agent, oxidative
stress has been described has the molecular mechanism of toxicity. Hence,
mercury has been shown to induce the formation of ROS known to cause DNA
damage in cells, a process which can lead to the initiation of carcinogenic
processes [238, 239]. The direct action of these free radicals on nucleic
acids may generate genetic mutations. Although mercury-containing compounds
are not mutagenic in bacterial assays, inorganic mercury has been shown to
induce mutational events in eukaryotic cell lines with doses as low as 0.5 µM
[240]. These free radicals may also induce conformational changes in proteins
that are responsible for DNA repair, mitotic spindle, and chromosomal
segregation [241]. To combat these effects, cells have antioxidant mechanisms
that work to correct and avoid the formation of ROS (free radicals) in excess.
These antioxidant mechanisms involve low molecular weight compounds such as
vitamins C and E, melatonin, glutathione, superoxide dismutase, catalase,
glutathione peroxidase and glutathione reductase that protect the cells by
chelating mercury and reducing its oxidative stress potential [242].

Glutathione levels in human populations exposed to methylmercury intoxication
by eating contaminated fish have been shown to be higher than normal [243].
These studies were also able to confirm a direct and positive correlation
between mercury and glutathione levels in blood. They also confirmed an
increased mitotic index and polyploidal aberrations associated with mercury
exposure [243]. Epidemiological studies have demonstrated that enzymatic
activity was altered in populations exposed to mercury; producing genotoxic
alterations, and suggesting that both chronic and relatively low level mercury
exposures may inhibit enzyme activity and induce oxidative stress in the cells
[244]. There is no doubt that the connection between mercury exposure and
carcinogenesis is very controversial. However, _in-vitro_ studies suggest that
the susceptibility to DNA damage exists as a result of cellular exposure to
mercury. These studies also indicate that mercury-induced toxicity and
carcinogenicity may be cell-, organ- and/or species- specific.

## Prospects

A comprehensive analysis of published data indicates that heavy metals such as
arsenic cadmium, chromium, lead, and mercury, occur naturally. However,
anthropogenic activities contribute significantly to environmental
contamination. These metals are systemic toxicants known to induce adverse
health effects in humans, including cardiovascular diseases, developmental
abnormalities, neurologic and neurobehavioral disorders, diabetes, hearing
loss, hematologic and immunologic disorders, and various types of cancer. The
main pathways of exposure include ingestion, inhalation, and dermal contact.
The severity of adverse health effects is related to the type of heavy metal
and its chemical form, and is also time- and dose-dependent. Among many other
factors, speciation plays a key role in metal toxicokinetics and
toxicodynamics, and is highly influenced by factors such as valence state,
particle size, solubility, biotransformation, and chemical form. Several
studies have shown that toxic metals exposure causes long term health problems
in human populations. Although the acute and chronic effects are known for
some metals, little is known about the health impact of mixtures of toxic
elements. Recent reports have pointed out that these toxic elements may
interfere metabolically with nutritionally essential metals such as iron,
calcium, copper, and zinc [245, 246]. However, the literature is scarce
regarding the combined toxicity of heavy metals. Simultaneous exposure to
multiple heavy metals may produce a toxic effect that is either additive,
antagonistic or synergistic.

A recent review of a number of individual studies that addressed metals
interactions reported that co-exposure to metal/metalloid mixtures of arsenic,
lead and cadmium produced more severe effects at both relatively high dose and
low dose levels in a biomarker-specific manner [247]. These effects were found
to be mediated by dose, duration of exposure and genetic factors. Also, human
co-exposure to cadmium and inorganic arsenic resulted in a more pronounced
renal damage than exposure to each of the elements alone [248]. In many areas
of metal pollution, chronic low dose exposure to multiple elements is a major
public health concern. Elucidating the mechanistic basis of heavy metal
interactions is essential for health risk assessment and management of
chemical mixtures. Hence, research is needed to further elucidate the
molecular mechanisms and public health impact associated with human exposure
to mixtures of toxic metals.

## Acknowledgement

This research was supported in by the National Institutes of Health RCMI Grant
No. 2G12RR013459, and in part by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration ECSC Grant No. NA06OAR4810164 & Subcontract No. 000953.

## References

      1. Fergusson JE, editor. The Heavy Elements: Chemistry, Environmental Impact and Health Effects. Oxford: Pergamon Press; 1990. [Google Scholar]

      2. Duffus JH. Heavy metals-a meaningless term? Pure Appl Chem. 2002;74(5):793–807. [Google Scholar]

      3. Bradl H, editor. Heavy Metals in the Environment: Origin, Interaction and Remediation Volume 6. London: Academic Press; 2002. [Google Scholar]

      4. He ZL, Yang XE, Stoffella PJ. Trace elements in agroecosystems and impacts on the environment. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2005;19(2-3):125–140. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      5. Goyer RA. Toxic effects of metals. In: Klaassen CD, editor. Cassarett and Doull's Toxicology: The Basic Science of Poisons. New York: McGraw-Hill Publisher; 2001. pp. 811–867. [Google Scholar]

      6. Herawati N, Suzuki S, Hayashi K, Rivai IF, Koyoma H. Cadmium, copper and zinc levels in rice and soil of Japan, Indonesia and China by soil type. Bull Env Contam Toxicol. 2000;64:33–39. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      7. Shallari S, Schwartz C, Hasko A, Morel JL. Heavy metals in soils and plants of serpentine and industrial sites of Albania. Sci Total Environ. 1998;19209:133–142. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      8. Nriagu JO. A global assessment of natural sources of atmospheric trace metals. Nature. 1989;338:47–49. [Google Scholar]

      9. Arruti A, Fernandez-Olmo I, Irabien A. Evaluation of the contribution of local sources to trace metals levels in urban PM2.5 and PM10 in the Cantabria region (Northern Spain) J Environ Monit. 2010;12(7):1451–1458. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      10. Strater E, Westbeld A, Klemm O. Pollution in coastal fog at Alto Patache, Northern Chile. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2010 [Epub ahead of print] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      11. Pacyna JM. Monitoring and assessment of metal contaminants in the air. In: Chang LW, Magos L, Suzuli T, editors. Toxicology of Metals. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1996. pp. 9–28. [Google Scholar]

      12. WHO/FAO/IAEA. World Health Organization. Switzerland: Geneva; 1996. Trace Elements in Human Nutrition and Health. [Google Scholar]

      13. Kabata- Pendia A 3rd, editor. Trace Elements in Soils and Plants. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2001. [Google Scholar]

      14. Hamelink JL, Landrum PF, Harold BL, William BH, editors. Bioavailability: Physical, Chemical, and Biological Interactions. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press Inc; 1994. [Google Scholar]

      15. Verkleji JAS. In: The effects of heavy metals stress on higher plants and their use as biomonitors In Plant as Bioindicators: Indicators of Heavy Metals in the Terrestrial Environment. Markert B, editor. New York: VCH; 1993. pp. 415–424. [Google Scholar]

      16. Stern BR. Essentiality and toxicity in copper health risk assessment: overview, update and regulatory considerations. Toxicol Environ Health A. 2010;73(2):114–127. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      17. Harvey LJ, McArdle HJ. Biomarkers of copper status: a brief update. Br J Nutr. 2008;99(S3):S10–S13. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      18. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) Toxicological Profile for Copper. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control; 2002. [Google Scholar]

      19. Tchounwou P, Newsome C, Williams J, Glass K. Copper-induced cytotoxicity and transcriptional activation of stress genes in human liver carcinoma cells. Metal Ions Biol Med. 2008;10:285–290. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      20. Chang LW, Magos L, Suzuki T, editors. Toxicology of Metals. Boca Raton. FL, USA: CRC Press; 1996. [Google Scholar]

      21. Wang S, Shi X. Molecular mechanisms of metal toxicity and carcinogenesis. Mol Cell Biochem. 2001;222:3–9. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      22. Beyersmann D, Hartwig A. Carcinogenic metal compounds: recent insight into molecular and cellular mechanisms. Arch Toxicol. 2008;82(8):493–512. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      23. Yedjou CG, Tchounwou PB. Oxidative stress in human leukemia cells (HL-60), human liver carcinoma cells (HepG2) and human Jerkat-T cells exposed to arsenic trioxide. Metal Ions Biol Med. 2006;9:298–303. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      24. Yedjou GC, Tchounwou PB. _In vitro_ cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of arsenic trioxide on human leukemia cells using the MTT and alkaline single cell gel electrophoresis (comet) assays. Mol Cell Biochem. 2007;301:123–130. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      25. Tchounwou PB, Centeno JA, Patlolla AK. Arsenic toxicity, mutagenesis and carcinogenesis - a health risk assessment and management approach. Mol Cell Biochem. 2004;255:47–55. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      26. Tchounwou PB, Ishaque A, Schneider J. Cytotoxicity and transcriptional activation of stress genes in human liver carcinoma cells (HepG2) exposed to cadmium chloride. Mol Cell Biochem. 2001;222:21–28. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      27. Patlolla A, Barnes C, Field J, Hackett D, Tchounwou PB. Potassium dichromate-induced cytotoxicity, genotoxicity and oxidative stress in human liver carcinoma (HepG2) cells. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2009;6:643–653. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      28. Patlolla A, Barnes C, Yedjou C, Velma V, Tchounwou PB. Oxidative stress, DNA damage and antioxidant enzyme activity induced by hexavalent chromium in Sprague Dawley rats. Environ Toxicol. 2009;24(1):66–73. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      29. Yedjou GC, Tchounwou PB. N-acetyl-cysteine affords protection against lead-induced cytotoxicity and oxidative stress in human liver carcinoma (HepG2) cells. Intl J Environ Res Public Health. 2008;4(2):132–137. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      30. Tchounwou PB, Yedjou CG, Foxx D, Ishaque A, Shen E. Lead-induced cytotoxicity and transcriptional activation of stress genes in human liver carcinoma cells (HepG2) Mol Cell Biochem. 2004;255:161–170. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      31. Sutton DJ, Tchounwou PB. Mercury induces the externalization of phosphatidylserine in human proximal tubule (HK-2) cells. Intl J Environ Res Public Health. 2007;4(2):138–144. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      32. Sutton D, Tchounwou PB, Ninashvili N, Shen E. Mercury induces cytotoxicity, and transcriptionally activates stress genes in human liver carcinoma cells. Intl J Mol Sci. 2002;3(9):965–984. [Google Scholar]

      33. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) Toxicological Profile for Arsenic TP-92/09. Georgia: Center for Disease Control, Atlanta; 2000. [Google Scholar]

      34. Tchounwou PB, Wilson B, Ishaque A. Important considerations in the development of public health advisories for arsenic and arsenic-containing compounds in drinking water. Rev Environ Health. 1999;14(4):211–229. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      35. Centeno JA, Tchounwou PB, Patlolla AK, Mullick FG, Murakat L, Meza E, Gibb H, Longfellow D, Yedjou CG. Environmental pathology and health effects of arsenic poisoning: a critical review. In: Naidu R, Smith E, Smith J, Bhattacharya P, editors. Managing Arsenic In the Environment: From Soil to Human Health. Adelaide, Australia: CSIRO Publishing Corp.; 2005. [Google Scholar]

      36. Rousselot P, Laboume S, Marolleau JP, Larghero T, Noguera ML, Brouet JC, Fermand JP. Arsenic trioxide and melarsoprol induce apoptosis in plasma cell lines and in plasma cells from myeloma patients. Cancer Res. 1999;59:1041–1048. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      37. National Research Council Canada (NRCC) Effects of Arsenic in the Environment. National Research Council of Canada; 1978. pp. 1–349. [Google Scholar]

      38. Morton WE, Dunnette DA. Health effects of environmental arsenic. In: Nriagu JO, editor. Arsenic in the Environment Part II: Human Health and Ecosystem Effects. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 1994. pp. 17–34. [Google Scholar]

      39. National Research Council. Arsenic in Drinking Water. 2001 Update. 2001 On line at: http://www.nap.edu/ books/0309076293/html/

      40. Tchounwou PB, Centeno JA. Toxicologic pathology. In: Gad SC, editor. Handbook of Pre-Clinical Development. New York. NY: John Wiley & Sons; 2008. pp. 551–580. [Google Scholar]

      41. Tchounwou PB, Patlolla AK, Centeno JA. Carcinogenic and systemic health effects associated with arsenic exposure-a critical review. Toxicol Pathol. 2003;31(6):575–588. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      42. Tchounwou PB, Wilson BA, Abdelgnani AA, Ishaque AB, Patlolla AK. Differential cytotoxicity and gene expression in human liver carcinoma (HepG2) cells exposed to arsenic trioxide and monosodium acid methanearsonate (MSMA) Intl J Mol Sci. 2002;3:1117–1132. [Google Scholar]

      43. Yedjou GC, Moore P, Tchounwou PB. Dose and time dependent response of human leukemia (HL-60) cells to arsenic trioxide. Intl J Environ Res Public Health. 2006;3(2):136–140. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      44. Chappell W, Beck B, Brown K, North D, Thornton I, Chaney R, Cothern R, Cothern CR, North DW, Irgolic K, Thornton I, Tsongas T. Inorganic arsenic: A need and an opportunity to improve risk assessment. Environ Health Perspect. 1997;105:1060–1067. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      45. Centeno JA, Gray MA, Mullick FG, Tchounwou PB, Tseng C. Arsenic in drinking water and health issues. In: Moore TA, Black A, Centeno JA, Harding JS, Trumm DA, editors. Metal Contaminants in New Zealand. New Zealand: Resolutionz Press; 2005. pp. 195–219. [Google Scholar]

      46. Abernathy CO, Liu YP, Longfellow D, Aposhian HV, Beck B, Fowler B, Goyer R, Menzer R, Rossman T, Thompson C, Waalkes R. Arsenic: health effects, mechanisms of actions and research issues. Environ Health Perspect. 1999;107:593–597. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      47. Hughes MF. Arsenic toxicity and potential mechanisms of action. Toxicol Lett. 2002;133:1–16. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      48. Wang Z, Rossman TG. In: The Toxicology of Metals. Cheng LW, editor. Vol. 1. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1996. pp. 221–243. [Google Scholar]

      49. Belton JC, Benson NC, Hanna ML, Taylor RT. Growth inhibition and cytotoxic effects of three arsenic compounds on cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells. J Environ Sci Health. 1985;20A:37–72. [Google Scholar]

      50. Li JH, Rossman TC. Inhibition of DNA ligase activity by arsenite: A possible mechanism of its comutagenesis. Mol Toxicol. 1989;2:1–9. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      51. Jha AN, Noditi M, Nilsson R, Natarajan AT. Genotoxic effects of sodium arsenite on human cells. Mutat Res. 1992;284:215–221. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      52. Hartmann A, Speit G. Comparative investigations of the genotoxic effects of metals in the single cell gel assay and the sister-chromatid exchange test. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1994;23:299–305. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      53. Patlolla A, Tchounwou PB. Cytogenetic evaluation of arsenic trioxide toxicity in Sprague-Dawley rats. Mut Res - Gen Tox Environ Mutagen. 2005;587(1-2):126–133. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      54. Basu A, Mahata J, Gupta S, Giri AK. Genetic toxicology of a paradoxical human carcinogen, arsenic: a review. Mutat Res. 2001;488:171–194. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      55. Landolph JR. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of transformation of C3H/10T1/2C18 and diploid human fibroblasts by unique carcinogenic, non- mutagenic metal compounds. A review. Biol Trace Elem Res. 1989;21:459–467. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      56. Takahashi M, Barrett JC, Tsutsui T. Transformation by inorganic arsenic compounds of normal Syrian hamster embryo cells into a neoplastic state in which they become anchorage-independent and cause tumors in newborn hamsters. Int J Cancer. 2002;99:629–634. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      57. Anderson D, Yu TW, Phillips BJ, Schemezer P. The effect of various antioxidants and other modifying agents on oxygen-radical-generated DNA damage in human lymphocytes in the Comet assay. Mutation Res. 1994;307:261–271. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      58. Saleha Banu B, Danadevi K, Kaiser Jamil, Ahuja YR, Visweswara Rao K, Ishap M. _In vivo_ genotoxic effect of arsenic trioxide in mice using comet assay. Toxicol. 2001;162:171–177. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      59. Hartmann A, Peit G. Comparative investigations of the genotoxic effects of metals in the single cell gel assay and the sister chromatid exchange test. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1994;23:299–305. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      60. Barrett JC, Lamb PW, Wang TC, Lee TC. Mechanisms of arsenic-induced cell transformation. Biol. Trace Ele Res. 1989;21:421–429. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      61. Tchounwou PB, Yedjou CG, Dorsey WC. Arsenic trioxide - induced transcriptional activation and expression of stress genes in human liver carcinoma cells (HepG2) Cell Mol Biol. 2003;49:1071–1079. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      62. Zhao CQ, Young MR, Diwan BA, Coogan TP, Waalkes MP. Association of arsenic-induced malignant transformation with DNA hypomethylation and aberrant gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1997;94:10907–10912. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      63. Liu Y, Guyton KZ, Gorospe M, Xu Q, Lee JC, Holbrook NJ. Differential activation of ERK, JNK/SAPK and P38/CSBP/RK map kinase family members during the cellular response to arsenite. Free Rad Biol Med. 1996;21:771–781. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      64. Ludwig S, Hoffmeyer A, Goebeler M, Kilian K, Hafner H, Neufeld B, Han J, Rapp UR. The stress inducer arsenite activates mitogen-activated protein kinases extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 via a MAPK kinase 6/p38- dependent pathway. J Biol Chem. 1998;273:1917–1922. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      65. Trouba KJ, Wauson EM, Vorce RL. Sodium arsenite-induced dysregulation of proteins involved in proliferative signaling. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000;164(2):161–170. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      66. Vogt BL, Rossman TG. Effects of arsenite on p53, p21 and cyclin D expression in normal human fibroblasts- a possible mechanism for arsenite's comutagenicity. Mutat Res. 2001;478(1-2):159–168. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      67. Chen NY, Ma WY, Huang C, Ding M, Dong Z. Activation of PKC is required for arsenite-induced signal transduction. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol. 2000;19(3):297–306. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      68. Porter AC, Fanger GR, Vaillancourt RR. Signal tansduction pathways regulated by arsenate and arsenite. Oncogene. 1999;18(54):7794–7802. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      69. Soignet SL, Frankel SR, Douer D, Tallman MS, Kantarjian H, Calleja E, Stone RM, Kalaycio M, Scheinberg DA, Steinherz P, Sievers EL, Coutre S, Dahlberg S, Ellison R, Warrell RP., Jr United States multicenter study of arsenic trioxide in relapsed acute promyelocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19(18):3852–3860. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      70. Murgo AJ. Clinical trials of arsenic trioxide in hematologic and solid tumors: overview of the National Cancer Institute Cooperative Research and Development Studies. Oncologist. 2001;6(2):22–28. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      71. Puccetti ES, Guller S, Orleth A, Bruggenolte N, Hoelzer D, Ottmann OG, Ruthardt M. BCR-ABL mediates arsenic trioxide-induced apoptosis independently of its aberrant kinase activity. Cancer Res. 2000;60(13):3409–3413. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      72. Seol JG, Park WH, Kim ES, Jung CW, Hyun JM, Kim BK, Lee YY. Effect of arsenic trioxide on cell cycle arrest in head and neck cancer cell-line PCI-1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999;265(2):400–404. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      73. Alemany M, Levin J. The effects of arsenic trioxide on human Megakaryocytic leukemia cell lines with a comparison of its effects on other cell lineages. Leukemia Lymphoma. 2000;38(1-2):153–163. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      74. Deaglio S, Canella D, Baj G, Arnulfo A, Waxman S, Malavasi F. Evidence of an immunologic mechanism behind the therapeutic effects of arsenic trioxide on myeloma cells. Leuk Res. 2001;25(3):237–239. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      75. Tully DB, Collins BJ, Overstreet JD, Smith CS, Dinse GE, Mumtaz MM, Chapin RE. Effects of arsenic, cadmium, chromium and lead on gene expression regulated by a battery of 13 different promoters in recombinant HepG2 cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000;168(2):79–90. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      76. Lu T, Liu J, LeCluyse EL, Zhou YS, Cheng ML, Waalkes MP. Application of cDNA microarray to the study of arsenic-induced liver diseases in the population of Guizhou, China. Toxicol Sci. 2001;59(1):185–192. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      77. Harris CC. Chemical and physical carcinogenesis: advances and perspectives. Cancer Res. 1991;51:5023s–5044s. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      78. Graham-Evans B, Colhy HHP, Yu H, Tchounwou PB. Arsenic-induced genotoxic and cytotoxic effects in human keratinocytes, melanocytes, and dendritic cells. Intl J Environ Res Public Health. 2004;1(2):83–89. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      79. Stevens JJ, Graham B, Walker AM, Tchounwou PB, Rogers C. The effects of arsenic trioxide on DNA synthesis and genotoxicity in human colon cancer cells. Intl J Environ Res Public Health. 2010;7(5):2018–2032. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      80. Walker AM, Stevens JJ, Ndebele K, Tchounwou PB. Arsenic trioxide modulates DNA synthesis and apoptosis in lung carcinoma cells. Intl J Environ Res Public Health. 2010;7(5):1996–2007. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      81. Yedjou CG, Tchounwou PB. Modulation of p53, _c-fos_ , RARE, cyclin A and cyclin D1 expression in human leukemia (HL-60) cells exposed to arsenic trioxide. Mol Cell Biochem. 2009;331:207–214. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      82. Yedjou C, Sutton LM, Tchounwou PB. Genotoxic mechanisms of arsenic trioxide effect in human Jurkat T-lymphoma cells. Metal Ions Biol Med. 2008;10:495–499. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      83. Brown E, Yedjou C, Tchounwou PB. Cytotoxicty and oxidative stress in human liver carcinoma cells exposed to arsenic trioxide. Metal Ions Biol Med. 2008;10:583–587. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      84. Yedjou CG, Thuisseu L, Tchounwou C, Gomes M, Howard C, Tchounwou PB. Ascorbic acid potentiation of arsenic trioxide anticancer activity against acute promyelocytic leukemia. Arch Drug Inf. 2009;2(4):59–65. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      85. Yedjou C, Rogers C, Brown E, Tchounwou P. Differential effect of ascorbic acid and n-acetyl-cysteine on arsenic trioxide - mediated oxidative stress in human leukemia (HL-60) cells. J Biochem Mol Tox. 2008;22:85–92. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      86. Yedjou GC, Moore P, Tchounwou PB. Dose- and time-dependent response of human leukemia (HL-60) cells to arsenic tic trioxide treatment. Intl J Environ Res Public Health. 2006;3(2):136–140. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      87. Miller WH, Schipper HM, Lee JS, Singer J, Waxman S. Mechanisms of action of arsenic trioxide - review. Cancer Res. 2002;62:3893–3903. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      88. Gesamp. IMO/FAO/UNESCO/WMO/WHO/IAEA/UN/UNEP Joint Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution: Report of the seventeenth session. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 1987. (Reports and Studies No. 31) [Google Scholar]

      89. Wilson DN Association Cadmium. Cadmium - market trends and influences; London. Cadmium 87 Proceedings of the 6th International Cadmium Conference; 1988. pp. 9–16. [Google Scholar]

      90. U.S Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) [accessed 4 March 2009];Cadmium Compounds. 2006 [Google Scholar]

      91. International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Monographs - Cadmium. Lyon, France: 1993. [Google Scholar]

      92. Paschal DC, Burt V, Caudill SP, Gunter EW, Pirkle JL, Sampson EJ, et al. Exposure of the U.S. population aged 6 years and older to cadmium: 1988-1994. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 2000;38:377–383. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      93. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) Draft Toxicological Profile for Cadmium. Atlanta, GA: 2008. [Google Scholar]

      94. Satarug S, Baker JR, Urbenjapol S, Haswell-Elkins M, Reilly PE, Williams DJ, et al. A global perspective on cadmium pollution and toxicity in non-occupationally exposed population. Toxicol Lett. 2003;137:65–83. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      95. Davison AG, Fayers PM, Taylor AJ, Venables KM, Darbyshire J, Pickering CA, et al. Cadmium fume inhalation and emphysema. Lancet. 1988;1(8587):663–667. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      96. Mascagni P, Consonni D, Bregante G, Chiappino G, Toffoletto F. Olfactory function in workers exposed to moderate airborne cadmium levels. Neurotoxicol. 2003;24:717–724. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      97. Åkesson A, Bjellerup P, Lundh T, Lidfeldt J, Nerbrand C, Samsioe G, et al. Cadmium-induced effects on bone in a population-based study of women. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:830–834. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      98. Gallagher CM, Kovach JS, Meliker JR. Urinary cadmium and osteoporosis in U.S. women ≥ 50 years of age: NHANES 1988-1994 and 1999-2004. Environ Health Perspect. 2008;116:1338–1343. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      99. Schutte R, Nawrot TS, Richart T, Thijs L, Vanderschueren D, Kuznetsova T, et al. Bone resorption and environmental exposure to cadmium in women: a population study. Environ Health Perspect. 2008;116:777–783. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      100. Jarup L, Berglund M, Elinder CG, et al. Health effects of cadmium exposure--a review of the literature and a risk estimate [published erratum appears in Scand J Work Environ Health 1998 Jun; 24(3):240] Scand J Work Environ Health. 1998;24(1):1. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      101. Wittman R, Hu H. Cadmium exposure and nephropathy in a 28-year-old female metals worker. Environ Health Perspect. 2002;110:1261. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      102. Becker K, Kaus S, Krause C, Lepom P, Schulz C, Seiwert M, et al. German Environmental Survey 1998 (GerES III): environmental pollutants in blood of the German population. Intl J Hyg Environ Health. 2002;205:297–308. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      103. Mannino DM, Holguin F, Greves HM, Savage-Brown A, Stock AL, Jones RL. Urinary cadmium levels predict lower lung function in current and former smokers: data from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Thorax. 2004;59:194–198. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      104. Elinder CG, Jarup L. Cadmium exposure and health risks: Recent findings. Ambio. 1996;25:370. [Google Scholar]

      105. Baselt RC, Cravey RH. Disposition of Toxic Drugs and Chemicals in Man. 4th Edn. Chicago, IL: Year Book Medical Publishers; 1995. pp. 105–107. [Google Scholar]

      106. Baselt RC. Disposition of Toxic Drugs and Chemicals in Man. 5th Ed. Foster City, CA: Chemical Toxicology Institute; 2000. [Google Scholar]

      107. Singhal RL, Merali Z, Hrdina PD. Aspects of the biochemical toxicology of cadmium. Fed Proc. 1976;35(1):75–80. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      108. Waalkes MP, Berthan G, editors. Handbook on Metal-Ligand Interactions of Biological Fluids. Vol. 2. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1995. pp. 471–482. [Google Scholar]

      109. Waalkes MP, Misra RR, Chang LW, editors. Toxicology of Metals. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1996. pp. 231–244. [Google Scholar]

      110. Waalkes MP, Rehm S. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1992;19:512. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      111. Stohs Bagchi. Oxidative mechanisms in the toxicity of metal ions. Free Radic Biol Med. 1995;18:321–336. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      112. Mitra RS. Protein synthesis in _Escherichia coli_ during recovery from exposure to low levels of Cd 2+ Appl Environ Microbiol. 1984;47:1012–1016. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      113. Blom A, Harder W, Matin A. Unique and overlapping pollutant stress proteins of _Escherichia coli_. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1992;58:331–334. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      114. Feriance PA, Farewell Nystrom T. The cadmium-stress stimulon of Escherichia coli K-12. Microbiol. 1998;144:1045–1050. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      115. Coogan TP, Bare RM, Waalkes MP. Cadmium-induced DNA strand damage in cultured liver cells: reduction in cadmium genotoxicity following zinc pretreatment. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1992;113:227–233. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      116. Tsuzuki K, Sugiyama M, Haramaki N. DNA single-strand breaks and cytotoxicity induced by chromate (VI), cadmium (II), and mercury (II) in hydrogen peroxide-resistant cell lines. Environ Health Perspect. 1994;102:341–342. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      117. Mukherjee S, Das SK, Kabiru W, Russell KR, Greaves K, Ademoyero AA, et al. Acute cadmium toxicity and male reproduction. Adv Reprod. 2002;6:143–155. [Google Scholar]

      118. Rossman TG, Roy NK, Lin WC. Is cadmium genotoxic? IARC Sci Publ. 1992;118:367–375. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      119. Smith JB, Dwyer SC, Smith L. Lowering extracellular pH evokes inositol polyphosphate formation and calcium mobilization. J Biol Chem. 1989;264:8723–8728. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      120. Th'evenod F, Jones SW. Cadmium block of calcium current in frog sympathetic neurons. Biophys J. 1992;63:162–168. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      121. Suszkiw J, Toth G, Murawsky M, Cooper GP. Effects of Pb2+ and Cd2+ on acetylcholine release and Ca2+ movements in synaptosomes and subcellular fractions from rat brain and Torpedo electric organ. Brain Res. 1984;323:31–46. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      122. Dally H, Hartwig A. Induction and repair inhibition of oxidative DNA damage by nickel (II) and cadmium (II) in mammalian cells. Carcinogenesis. 1997;18:1021–1026. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      123. Abshire MK, Devor DE, Diwan BA, Shaughnessy JD, Jr, Waalkes MP. _In vitro_ exposure to cadmium in rat L6 myoblasts can result in both enhancement and suppression of malignant progression in vivo. Carcinogenesis. 1996;17:1349–1356. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      124. Durnam DM, Palmiter RD. Transcriptional regulation of the mouse metallothionein-I gene by heavy metals. J Biol Chem. 1981;256:5712–5716. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      125. Hwua Y, Yang J. Effect of 3-aminotriazole on anchorage independence and mutagenicity in cadmium- and lead-treated diploid human fibroblasts. Carcinogenesis. 1998;19:881–888. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      126. Landolph J. Molecular mechanisms of transformation of CH3/10T1/2 C1 8 mouse embryo cells and diploid human fibroblasts by carcinogenic metal compounds. Environ Health Perspect. 1994;102:119–125. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      127. Nishijo M, Tawara K, Honda R, Nakagawa H, Tanebe K, Saito S. Relationship between newborn size and mother's blood cadmium levels, Toyama, Japan. Arch Environ Health. 2004;59(1):22–25. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      128. Zhang YL, Zhao YC, Wang JX, Zhu HD, Liu QF, Fan YG, et al. Effect of environmental exposure to cadmium on pregnancy outcome and fetal growth: a study on healthy pregnant women in China. J Environ Sci Health B. 2004;39:2507–2515. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      129. Jacobs JA, Testa SM. Overview of chromium(VI) in the environment: background and history. In: Guertin J, Jacobs JA, Avakian CP, editors. Chromium (VI) Handbook. Boca Raton, Fl: CRC Press; 2005. pp. 1–22. [Google Scholar]

      130. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) Toxicological Profile for Chromium. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service; [Google Scholar]

      131. IARC. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans Vol. 49. Lyon, France: IARC Scientific Publications, IARC; 1990. Chromium, nickel and welding. [Google Scholar]

      132. U.S. EPA. Environmental Criteria and Assessment Office. Cincinnati, OH: United States Environmental Protection Agency; 1992. Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) [Google Scholar]

      133. Velma V, Vutukuru SS, Tchounwou PB. Ecotoxicology of hexavalent chromium in freshwater fish: a critical review. Rev Environ Health. 2009;24(2):129–145. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      134. Cohen MD, Kargacin B, Klein CB, Costa M. Mechanisms of chromium carcinogenicity and toxicity. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1993;23:255–281. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      135. Norseth T. The carcinogenicity of chromium. Environ Health Perspect. 1981;40:121–130. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      136. Wang XF, Xing ML, Shen Y, Zhu X, Xu LH. Oral administration of Cr (VI) induced oxidative stress, DNA damage and apoptotic cell death in mice. Toxicology. 2006;228:16–23. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      137. Guertin J. Toxicity and health effects of chromium (all oxidation states) In: Guertin J, Jacobs JA, Avakian CP, editors. Chromium (VI) Handbook. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2005. pp. 216–234. [Google Scholar]

      138. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Federal Register. Vol. 71. Washington, DC: Final rule; 2006. Occupational exposure to hexavalent chromium; pp. 10099–10385. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      139. Singh J, Pritchard DE, Carlisle DL, Mclean JA, Montaser A, Orenstein JM, Patierno SR. Internalization of carcinogenic lead chromate particles by cultured normal human lung epithelial cells: Formation of intracellular lead-inclusion bodies and induction of apoptosis. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999;161:240–248. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      140. Langard S, Vigander T. Occurrence of lung cancer in workers producing chromium pigments. Br J Ind Med. 1983;40(1):71–74. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      141. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 2008. Toxicological Profile for Chromium. [Google Scholar]

      142. Costa M. Toxicity and carcinogenicity of Cr(VI) in animal models and humans. Critical Reviews in Toxicology. 1997;27:431–442. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      143. Shelnutt SR, Goad P, Belsito DV. Dermatological toxicity of hexavalent chromium. Crit. Rev Toxicol. 2007;37:375–387. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      144. WHO/IPCS. World Health Organization. Geneva, Switzerland: 1988. Environmental Health Criteria 61: Chromium. [Google Scholar]

      145. Chen TL, Wise SS, Kraus S, Shaffiey F, Levine K, Thompson DW, Romano T, O'Hara T, Wise JP. Particulate hexavalent chromium is cytotoxic and genotoxic to the North Atlantic right whale (Eubalaena glacialis) lung and skin fibroblasts. Environ Mol Mutagenesis. 2009;50:387–393. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      146. Connett PH, Wetterhahn KE. Metabolism of carcinogenic chromate by cellular constituents. Struct Bonding. 1983;54:93–24. [Google Scholar]

      147. De Flora S, Bagnasco M, Serra D, Zanacchi P. Genotoxicity of chromium compounds: a review. Mutat Res. 1990;238:99–172. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      148. Dayan AD, Paine AJ. Mechanisms of chromium toxicity, carcinogenicity and allergenicity: review of the literature from 1985 to 2000. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2001;20(9):439–451. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      149. De Mattia G, Bravi MC, Laurenti O, De Luca O, Palmeri A, Sabatucci A, Mendico G, Ghiselli A. Impairment of cell and plasma redox state in subjects professionally exposed to chromium. Am J Ind Med. 2004;46(2):120–125. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      150. O' Brien TJ, Ceryak S, Patierno SR. Complexities of chromium carcinogenesis: role of cellular response, repair and recovery mechanisms. Mutat Res. 2003;533:3–36. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      151. Kim E, Na KJ. Nephrotoxicity of sodium dichromate depending on the route of administration. Arch Toxicol. 1991;65:537–541. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      152. Gumbleton M, Nicholls PJ. Dose-response and time-response biochemical and histological study of potassium dichromate-induced nephrotoxicity in the rat. Food Chem Toxicol. 1988;26:37–44. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      153. Bagchi D, Hassoun EA, Bagchi M, Muldoon D, Stohs SJ. Oxidative stress induced by chronic administration of sodium dichromate (Cr VI) to rats. Comp Biochem Physiol. 1995;1995;110C:281–287. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      154. Bagchi D, Vuchetich PJ, Bagchi M, Hassoun EA, Tran MX, Tang L, Stohs SJ. Induction of oxidative stress by chronic administration of sodium dichromate (chromium VI) and cadmium chloride (cadmium II) to rats. Free Rad Biol Med. 1997;22:471–478. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      155. Gambelunghe A, Piccinini R, Ambrogi M, Villarini M, Moretti M, Marchetti C, Abbritti G, Muzi G. Primary DNA damage in chrome-plating workers. Toxicology. 2003;188(2-3):187–195. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      156. Goulart M, Batoreu MC, Rodrigues AS, Laires A, Rueff J. Lipoperoxidation products and thiol antioxidants in chromium-exposed workers. Mutagenesis. 2005;20(5):311–315. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      157. Wise JP, Wise SS, Little JE. The cytotoxicity and genotoxicity of particulate and soluble hexavalent chromium in human lung cells. Mutat Res. 2002;517:221–229. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      158. Wise SS, Holmes AL, Ketterer ME, Hartsock WJ, Fomchenko E, Katsifis SP, Thompson WD, Wise JP. Chromium is the proximate clastogenic species for lead chromate-induced clastogenicity in human bronchial cells. Mutat Res. 2004;560:79–89. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      159. Xie H, Wise SS, Holmes AL, Xu B, Wakeman T, Pelsue SC, Singh NP, Wise JP. Carcinogenic lead chromate induces DNA double-strand breaks in human lung cells. Mutat Res. 2005;586:160–172. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      160. Zhitkovich A, Song Y, Quievryn G, Voitkun V. Non-oxidative mechanisms are responsible for the induction of mutagenesis by reduction of Cr(VI) with cysteine: role of ternary DNA adducts in Cr(III)-dependent mutagenesis. Biochem. 2001;40(2):549–60. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      161. Katz SA, Salem H. The toxicology of chromium with respect to its chemical speciation: a review. J Appl Toxicol. 1993;13(3):217–224. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      162. Patlolla AK, Armstrong N, Tchounwou PB. Cytogenetic evaluation of potassium dichromate toxicity in bone marrow cells of Sprague-Dawley rats. Metal Ions Biol Med. 2008;10:353–358. [Google Scholar]

      163. Velma V, Tchounwou PB. Chromium-induced biochemical, genotoxic and histopathologic effects in liver and kidney of goldfish, carassius auratus. Mutat Res. 2010;698(1-2):43–51. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      164. Norseth T. The carcinogenicity of chromium and its salts. Br J Ind Med. 1986;3(10):649–651. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      165. Gabby PN. Lead: in Mineral Commodity Summaries. Reston, VA: U.S. Geological Survey; 2006. available at http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/lead/lead_mcs05.pdf. [Google Scholar]

      166. Gabby PN. "Lead." Environmental Defense "Alternatives to Lead-Acid Starter Batteries," Pollution Prevention Fact Sheet. 2003 available at http://www.cleancarcampaign.org/FactSheet_BatteryAlts.pdf.

      167. Centers for Disease control (CDC) Preventing Lead Poisoning in Young children: A statement by the Centers for Disease Control. Atlanta, GA: 1991. [Google Scholar]

      168. Jacobs DE, Clickner RP, Zhou JY, et al. The prevalence of lead-based paint hazards in U.S. housing. Environ Health Perspect. 2002;110:A599–A606. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      169. Farfel MR, Chisolm JJ., Jr An evaluation of experimental practices for abatement of residential lead-based paint: report on a pilot project. Environ Res. 1991;55:199–212. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      170. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC) Managing Elevated Blood Lead Levels Among Young Children: Recommendations From the Advisory Committee on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention. Atlanta: 2001. [Google Scholar]

      171. Lanphear BP, Matte TD, Rogers J, et al. The contribution of lead-contaminated house dust and residential soil to children's blood lead levels. A pooled analysis of 12 epidemiologic studies. Environ Res. 1998;79:51–68. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      172. Charney E, Sayre J, Coulter M. Increased lead absorption in inner city children: where does the lead come from? Pediatrics. 1980;6:226–231. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      173. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR. Public Health Service. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 1999. Toxicological Profile for Lead. [Google Scholar]

      174. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) Case Studies in Environmental Medicine - Lead Toxicity. Atlanta: Public Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 1992. [Google Scholar]

      175. Flora SJS, Flora GJS, Saxena G. Environmental occurrence, health effects and management of lead poisoning. In: Cascas SB, Sordo J, editors. Lead: Chemistry, Analytical Aspects, Environmental Impacts and Health Effects. Netherlands: Elsevier Publication; 2006. pp. 158–228. [Google Scholar]

      176. Pirkle JL, Brady DJ, Gunter EW, Kramer RA, Paschal DC, Flegal KM, Matte TD. The decline in blood lead levels in the United States: The National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (NHANES) J Am Med Assoc. 1994;272:284–291. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      177. Pirkle JL, Kaufmann RB, Brody DJ, Hickman T, Gunter EW, Paschal DC. Exposure of the U.S. population to lead: 1991-1994. Environ Health Perspect. 1998;106(11):745–750. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      178. United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) Lead Compounds. Technology Transfer Network- Air Toxics Website. 2002 Online at: http://www.epa.gov/cgi-bin/epaprintonly.cgi.

      179. Kaul B, Sandhu RS, Depratt C, Reyes F. Follow-up screening of lead-poisoned children near an auto battery recycling plant, Haina, Dominican Republic. Environ Health Perspect. 1999;107(11):917–920. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      180. Ong CN, Phoon WO, Law HY, Tye CY, Lim HH. Concentrations of lead in maternal blood, cord blood, and breast milk. Arch Dis Child. 1985;60:756–759. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      181. Corpas I, Gaspar I, Martinez S, Codesal J, Candelas S, Antonio MT. Testicular alterations in rats due to gestational and early lactational administration of lead. Report Toxicol. 1995;9:307–313. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      182. Andrews KW, Savitz DA, Hertz-Picciotto I. Prenatal lead exposure in relation to gestational age and birth weight: a review of epidemiologic studies. Am J Ind Med. 1994;26:13–32. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      183. Huel G, Tubert P, Frery N, Moreau T, Dreyfus J. Joint effect of gestational age and maternal lead exposure on psychomotor development of the child at six years. Neurotoxicol. 1992;13:249–254. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      184. Litvak P, Slavkovich V, Liu X, Popovac D, Preteni E, Capuni-Paracka S, Hadzialjevic S, Lekic V, Lolacono N, Kline J, Graziano J. Hyperproduction of erythropoietin in nonanemic lead-exposed children. Environ Health Perspect. 1998;106(6):361–364. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      185. Amodio-Cocchieri R, Arnese A, Prospero E, Roncioni A, Barulfo L, Ulluci R, Romano V. Lead in human blood form children living in Campania, Italy. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1996;47:311–320. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      186. Hertz-Picciotto I. The evidence that lead increases the risk for spontaneous abortion. Am J Ind Med. 2000;38:300–309. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      187. Apostoli P, Kiss P, Stefano P, Bonde JP, Vanhoorne M. Male reproduction toxicity of lead in animals and humans. Occup Environ Med. 1998;55:364–374. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      188. Flora SJS, Saxena G, Gautam P, Kaur P, Gill KD. Lead induced oxidative stress and alterations in biogenic amines in different rat brain regions and their response to combined administration of DMSA and MiADMSA. Chem Biol Interac. 2007;170:209–220. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      189. Hermes-Lima M, Pereira B, Bechara EJ. Are free radicals involved in lead poisoning? Xenobiotica. 1991;8:1085–1090. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      190. Jiun YS, Hsien LT. Lipid peroxidation in workers exposed to lead. Arch Environ Health. 1994;49:256–259. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      191. Bechara EJ, Medeiros MH, Monteiro HP, Hermes-Lima M, Pereira B, Demasi M. A free radical hypothesis of lead poisoning and inborn porphyrias associated with 5-aminolevulinic acid overload. Quim Nova. 1993;16:385–392. [Google Scholar]

      192. Yedjou CG, Steverson M, Paul Tchounwou PB. Lead nitrate-induced oxidative stress in human liver carcinoma (HepG2) cells. Metal Ions Biol Med. 2006;9:293–297. [Google Scholar]

      193. Yedjou CG, Milner J, Howard C, Tchounwou PB. Basic apoptotic mechanisms of lead toxicity in human leukemia (HL-60) cells. Intl J Environ Res Public Health. 2010;7(5):2008–2017. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      194. Goldstein G. Evidence that lead acts as a calcium substitute in second messenger metabolism. Neurotoxicol. 1993;14:97–102. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      195. Simons T. Lead-calcium interactions in cellular lead toxicity. Neurotoxicol. 1993;14:77–86. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      196. Vijverberg HPM, Oortgiesen M, Leinders T, van Kleef RGDM. Metal interactions with voltage- and receptor-activated ion channels. Environ Health Perspect. 1994;102(3):153–158. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      197. Schanne FA, Long GJ, Rosen JF. Lead induced rise in intracellular free calcium is mediated through activation of protein kinase C in osteoblastic bone cells. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997;1360(3):247–254. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      198. Waalkes MP, Hiwan BA, Ward JM, Devor DE, Goyer RA. Renal tubular tumors and a typical hepper plasics in B6C3F, mice exposed to lead acetate during gestation and lactation occur with minimal chronic nephropathy. Cancer Res. 1995;55:5265–5271. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      199. Goyer RA. Lead toxicity: current concerns. Environ Health Prospect. 1993;100:177–187. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      200. International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) In IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Supplement 7. Volumes 1-42. Lyons, France: IARC; 1987. Overall Evaluation of Carcinogenicity: An updating of Monographs; pp. 230–232. [Google Scholar]

      201. Yang JL, Wang LC, Chamg CY, Liu TY. Singlet oxygen is the major species participating in the induction of DNA strand breakage and 8-hydrocy-deoxyguanosine adduct by lead acetate. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1999;33:194–201. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      202. Lin RH, Lee CH, Chen WK, Lin-Shiau SY. Studies on cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of cadmium nitrate and lead nitrate in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1994;23:143–149. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      203. Dipaolo JA, Nelson Rh, Casto BC. _In-vitro_ neoplastic transformation of Syrian hamster cell by lead acetate and its relevance to environmental carcinogenesis. Br J Cancer. 1978;38:452–455. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      204. Hwua YS, Yang JL. Effect of 3-amonotriazole on anchorage independence and multgenicity in cadmium-treated and lead-treated diploid human fibroblasts. Carcinogenesis. 1998;19:881–888. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      205. Roy N, Rossman T. Mutagenesis and comutagenesis by lead compounds. Mutat Res. 1992;298:97–103. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      206. Wise JP, Orenstein JM, Patierno SR. Inhibition of lead chromate clastogenesis by ascorbate: relationship to particle dissolution and uptake. Carcinogenesis. 1993;14:429–434. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      207. Clarkson TW, Magos L, Myers GJ. The toxicology of mercury-current exposures and clinical manifestations. New Engl J Med. 2003;349:1731–1737. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      208. Guzzi G, LaPorta CAM. Molecular mechanisms triggered by mercury. Toxicol. 2008;244:1–12. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      209. Dopp E, Hartmann LM, Florea AM, Rettenmier AW, Hirner AV. Environmental distribution, analysis, and toxicity of organometal (loid) compounds. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2004;34:301–333. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      210. Sarkar BA. Mercury in the environment: Effects on health and reproduction. Rev Environ Health. 2005;20:39–56. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      211. Zahir A, Rizwi SJ, Haq SK, Khan RH. Low dose mercury toxicity and human health. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2005;20:351–360. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      212. Holmes P, Hames KAF, Levy LS. Is low-level mercury exposure of concern to human health? Sci Total Environ. 2009;408:171–182. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      213. Tchounwou PB, Ayensu WK, Ninashvilli N, Sutton D. Environmental exposures to mercury and its toxicopathologic implications for public health. Environ Toxicol. 2003;18:149–175. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      214. U.S. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) Mercury Study Report to Congress. 1997 Available at: http://www.epa.gov/mercury /report.htm.

      215. Sarkar BA. Mercury in the environment: Effects on health and reproduction. Rev Environ Health. 2005;20:39–56. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      216. Dopp E, Hartmann LM, Florea AM, Rettenmier AW, Hirner AV. Environmental distribution, analysis, and toxicity of organometal (loid) compounds. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2004;34:301–333. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      217. Sanfeliu C, Sebastia J, Cristofol R, Rodriquez-Farre E. Neurotoxicity of organomercurial compounds. Neurotox. Res. 2003;5:283–305. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      218. Zahir A, Rizwi SJ, Haq SK, Khan RH. Low dose mercury toxicity and human health. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2005;20:351–360. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      219. Guzzi G, LaPorta CAM. Molecular mechanisms triggered by mercury. Toxicology. 2008;244:1–12. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      220. Valko M, Morris H, Cronin MTD. Metals, Toxicity, and oxidative Stress. Curr Medici Chem. 2005;12:1161–1208. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      221. Valko M, Rhodes CJ, Monocol J, Izakovic-Mazur M. Free radicals, metals and antioxidants in oxidative stress-induced cancer. Chem Biol Interac. 2006;160:1–40. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      222. Shenker BJ, Guo TL, Shapiro IM. Mercury-induced apoptosis in human lymphoid cells: Evidence that the apoptotic pathway is mercurial species dependent. Environ Res Sec A. 2000;84:89–99. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      223. Palmeira CM, Madeira VMC. Mercuric chloride toxicity in rat liver mitochondria and isolated hepatocytes. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 1997;3:229–235. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      224. Lund BO, Miller DM, Woods JS. Mercury induced H2O2 formation and lipid peroxidation in vitro in rat kidney mitochondria. Biochem Pharmacol. 1991;42:S181–S187. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      225. Clarkson TW, Magos L. The toxicology of mercury and its chemical _compounds_. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2006;36:609–662. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      226. Sunja Kim S, Dayani L, Rosenberg PA, Li J. RIP1 kinase mediates arachidonic acid-induced oxidative death of oligodendrocyte precursors. Intl Physiol Pathophysiol Pharmacol. 2010;2(2):137–147. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      227. Lash LH, Putt DA, Hueni SE, Payton SG, Zwicki J. Interactive toxicity of inorganic mercury and trichloroethylene in rat and human proximal tubules (Effects of apoptosis, necrosis, and glutathione status) Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007;221(3):349–362. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      228. Lund BO, Miller DM, Woods JS. Mercury induced H2O2 formation and lipid peroxidation in vitro in rat kidney mitochondria. Biochem Pharmacol. 1991;42:S181–S187. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      229. Rooney JPK. The role of thiols, dithiols, nutritional factors and interacting ligands in the toxicology of mercury. Toxicol. 2007;234:145–156. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      230. Agarwal R, Goel SK, Chandra R, Behari JR. Role of viamin E in preventing acute mercury toxicity in rat. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2010;29:70–78. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      231. Leaner VD, Donninger H, Birrer MJ. Transcription Factors as Targets for Cancer Therapy: AP-1 a Potential Therapeutic Target. Curr Cancer Therap Rev. 2007;3:1–6. [Google Scholar]

      232. Marnett LJ. Oxyradicals and DNA damage. Carcinogenesis. 2000;21(3):361–370. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      233. Zalups RK, Koropatnik J, editors. Molecular Biology and Toxicology of Metals. London: Taylor & Francis; 2000. [Google Scholar]

      234. Magos L, Clarkson TW. Overview of the clinical toxicity of mercury. Ann Clin Biochem. 2006;43:257–268. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      235. Valko M, Izakovic M, Mazur M, Rhodes CJ, Tesler J. Role of oxygen radicals in DNA damage and cancer incidence. Mol Cell Biochem. 2004;266:79–110. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      236. Crespo-Lopez MR, Macedo GL, Pereira SID, Arrifano GPF, Picano-Dinc DLW, doNascimento JLM, Herculano AM. Mercury and human genotoxicity: Critical considerations and possible molecular mechanisms. Pharmacol Res. 2009;60:212–220. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      237. Valko M, Izakovic M, Mazur M, Rhodes CJ, Tesler J. Role of oxygen radicals in DNA damage and cancer incidence. Mol Cell Biochem. 2004;266:79–110. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      238. Valko M, Rhodes CJ, Monocol J, Izakovic-Mazur M. Free radicals, metals and antioxidants in oxidative stress-induced cancer. Chem Biol Interac. 2006;160:1–40. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      239. Ogura H, Takeuchi T, Morimoto KA. A comparison of the 8-hydroxyl-deoxyguanosine, chromosome aberrations and micronucleus techniques for the assessment of the genotoxicity of mercury compounds in human blood lymphocytes. Mut Res. 1996;340:175–182. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      240. Inoue M, Sato EF, Nishikawa M, Park AM, Kari Y, Imada I, Utsumi K. Mitochondrial generation of reactive oxygen species and its role in aerobic life. Curr Med Chem. 2003;10:2495–2505. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      241. Valko M, Rhodes CJ, Monocol J, Izakovic-Mazur M. Free radicals, metals and antioxidants in oxidative stress-induced cancer. Chem Biol Interac. 2006;160:1–40. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      242. Pinheiro MCN, Macchi BM, Vieira JLF, Oikawa T, Amoras WW, Santos EO. Mercury exposure and antioxidant defenses in women: a comparative study in the Amazon. Environ Res. 2008;107:53–59. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      243. Amorim MI, Mergler D, Bahia MO, Miranda H, Lebel J. Cytogenetic damage related to low levels of methylmercury contamination in the Brazilian Amazon. Ann Acad Bras Cienc. 2000;72:497–507. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      244. Rana SVS. Metals and apoptosis: recent developments. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2008;22:262–284. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      245. Lopez Alonso M, Prieto Montaña F, Miranda M, Castillo C, Hernandez J, Luis Benedito J. Interactions between toxic (As, Cd, Hg and Pb) and nutritional essential (Ca, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, Se, Zn) elements in the tissues of cattle from NW Spain. Biometals. 2004;17(4):389–97. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      246. Abdulla M, Chmielnicka J. New aspects on the distribution and metabolism of essential trace elements after dietary exposure to toxic metals. Biol Trace Elem Res. 1990;23:25–53. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      247. Wang G, Fowler BA. Roles of biomarkers in evaluating interactions among mixtures of lead, cadmium and arsenic. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008;233(1):92–99. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

      248. Nordberg GF, Jin T, Hong F, Zhang A, Buchet JP, Bernard A. Biomarkers of cadmium and arsenic interactions. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;206(2):191–197. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

## Formats:

        
                  * Article
        

|

        
                  * PubReader
        

|

        
                  * ePub (beta)
        

|

        
                  * PDF (138K)
        

|

        
                  * Citation
        

## Share

        
                  * ![Share on Facebook](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047626) Facebook 
          * ![Share on Twitter](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047627) Twitter 
          * ![Share on Google Plus](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047628) Google+
        

Support Center Support Center

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

![statistics](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_db=pmc&ncbi_pdid=article&ncbi_acc=&ncbi_domain=nihpa&ncbi_report=record&ncbi_type=fulltext&ncbi_objectid=&ncbi_pcid=/articles/PMC4144270/&ncbi_app=pmc)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

