

Skip to main content

SubscribeMenu

Scientific American

        
                  * Cart 0
          * Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?Login![Loading](/public/resources/loader-eba9d808f62929c2c4c744e562eca7d9.gif)Not yet registered?
          * |Stay Informed
        

SearchSubscribe

Close

SearchClose

Advanced Search

        
                  * The Sciences
          * Mind
          * Health
          * Tech
          * Sustainability
          * Education
          * Video
          * Podcasts
          * Blogs
          * Publications
          * Subscribe
          * Current Issue
          * Cart0
          * Sign In
          * Stay Informed
        
          * Share
          * Latest
        
          *       *       *       * Climate
        

# Ask the Experts: Does Rising CO2 Benefit Plants?

Climate change's negative effects on plants will likely outweigh any gains
from elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide levels

        
                  * By Annie Sneed on January 23, 2018
        
          * Share on Facebook
        
          * Share on Twitter
        
          * Share on Reddit
        
          * Share on LinkedIn
        
          * Share via
        
          * Print
        

![Ask the Experts: Does Rising CO2 Benefit

Plants?](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/57462986-3B9F-4AAB-B7062E95CE48D7B7_source.jpg?w=590&h=800&BCFF7511-6A1E-413A-8CDA3E074146B881)

Credit: Edwin Remsberg _Getty Images_

Advertisement

Climate change skeptics have an arsenal of arguments for why humans need not
cut their carbon emissions. Some assert rising CO2 levels benefit plants, so
global warming is not as bad as scientists proclaim. "A higher concentration
of carbon dioxide in our atmosphere would aid photosynthesis, which in turn
contributes to increased plant growth," Rep. Lamar Smith (R-Texas) wrote in an
op-ed last year. "This correlates to a greater volume of food production and
better quality food." Scientists and others calling for emission cuts are
being hysterical, he contends.

So is it true rising atmospheric CO2 will help plants, including food crops?
_Scientific American_ asked several experts to talk about the science behind
this question.

There is a kernel of truth in this argument, experts say, based on what
scientists call the CO2 fertilization effect. "CO2 is essential for
photosynthesis," says Richard Norby, a corporate research fellow in the
Environmental Sciences Division and Climate Change Science Institute of Oak
Ridge National Laboratory. "If you isolate a leaf [in a laboratory] and you
increase the level of CO2, photosynthesis will increase. That's well
established." But Norby notes the results scientists produce in labs are
generally not what happens in the vastly more complex world outside; many
other factors are involved in plant growth in untended forests, fields and
other ecosystems. For example, "nitrogen is often in short enough supply that
it's the primary controller of how much biomass is produced" in an ecosystem,
he says. "If nitrogen is limited, the benefit of the CO2 increase is limited….
You can't just look at CO2, because the overall context really matters."

Scientists have observed the CO2 fertilization effect in natural ecosystems,
including in a series of trials conducted over the past couple decades in
outdoor forest plots. In those experiments artificially doubling CO2 from pre-
industrial levels increased trees' productivity by around 23 percent, ****
according to Norby, who was involved in the trials. For one of the
experiments, however, that effect significantly diminished over time due to a
nitrogen limitation. That suggests "we cannot assume the CO2 fertilization
effect will persist indefinitely," Norby says.

In addition to ignoring the long-term outlook, he says, many skeptics also
fail to mention the potentially most harmful outcome of rising atmospheric CO2
on vegetation: climate change itself. Its negative consequences--such as
drought and **** heat stress--would likely overwhelm any direct benefits that
rising CO2 might offer plant life. "It's not appropriate to look at the CO2
fertilization effect in isolation," he says. "You can have positive and
negative things going at once, and it's the net balance that matters." So
although there is a basic truth to skeptics' claim, he says, "what's missing
from that argument is that it's not the whole picture."

Scientists have also looked specifically at the effects of rising CO2 on
agricultural plants and found a fertilization effect. "For a lot of crops,
[more CO2] is like having extra material in the atmosphere that they can use
to grow," says Frances Moore, an assistant professor of environmental science
and policy **** at the University of California, Davis. She and other experts
note there is an exception for certain types of plants such as corn, which
access CO2 for photosynthesis in a unique way. But for most of the other
plants humans eat--including wheat, rice and soybeans--"having higher CO2 will
help them directly," Moore says. Doubling CO2 from pre-industrial levels, she
adds, does boost the productivity of crops like wheat by some 11.5 percent and
of those such as corn by around 8.4 percent.

A lack of nitrogen or other nutrients does not affect agricultural plants as
much as wild ones, thanks to fertilizer. Still, research shows plants "get
some benefits early on from higher CO2, but that [benefit] starts to saturate"
after the gas reaches a certain level, Moore says--adding, "The more CO2 you
have, the less and less benefit you get." And while rising carbon dioxide
might seem like a boon for agriculture, Moore also emphasizes any potential
positive effects cannot be considered in isolation, and will likely be
outweighed by many drawbacks. "Even with the benefit of CO2 fertilization,
when you start getting up to 1 to 2 degrees of warming, you see negative
effects," she says. "There are a lot of different pathways by which
temperature can negatively affect crop yield: soil moisture deficit [or] heat
directly damaging the plants and interfering with their reproductive process."
On top of all that, Moore points out increased CO2 also benefits weeds that
compete with farm plants.

Rising CO2's effect on crops could also harm human health. "We know
unequivocally that when you grow food at elevated CO2 levels in fields, it
becomes less nutritious," notes Samuel Myers, principal research scientist in
environmental health at Harvard University. "[Food crops] lose significant
amounts of iron and zinc--and grains [also] lose protein." Myers and other
researchers have found atmospheric CO2 levels predicted for mid-century--
around 550 parts per million--could make food crops lose enough of those key
nutrients to cause a protein deficiency in an estimated 150 million people and
a zinc deficit in an additional 150 million to 200 million. (Both of those
figures are in addition to the number of people who already have such a
shortfall.) A total of 1.4 billion women of child-bearing age and young
children who live in countries with a high prevalence of anemia would lose
more than 3.8 percent of their dietary iron at such CO2 levels, according to
Meyers.

Researchers do not yet know why higher atmospheric CO2 alters crops'
nutritional content. But, Myers says, "the bottom line is, we know that rising
CO2 reduces the concentration of critical nutrients around the world," adding
that these kinds of nutritional deficiencies are already significant public
health threats, and will only worsen as CO2 levels go up. "The problem with
[the skeptics'] argument is that it's as if you can cherry-pick the CO2
fertilization effect from the overall effect of adding carbon dioxide to the
atmosphere," Myers says. But that is not how the world--or its climate--works.

![](/themes/responsive/images/global/rightsPermsIcon.png) Rights & Permissions

### ABOUT THE AUTHOR(S)

#### Annie Sneed

#### Recent Articles

        
                  * What Conservation Efforts Can Learn from Indigenous Communities
          * Bird Beak Shapes Depend on More Than Diet
          * New York Is Building "Living" Wave Barriers to Prepare for the Next Superstorm
        

## Read This Next

![Genetics May Hold the Key to Climate Change Solutions for

Plants](/public/resources/icon__SA-logo-placeholder--

rect-3166a74694258e68c9c9fd6e14c45ff6.jpg)

Sustainability

### Genetics May Hold the Key to Climate Change Solutions for Plants

January 28, 2014 — Thomas Whitham and The Conversation

![Wild Plants Respond to Climate Change Quicker Than Science

Suggested](/public/resources/icon__SA-logo-placeholder--

rect-3166a74694258e68c9c9fd6e14c45ff6.jpg)

Sustainability

### Wild Plants Respond to Climate Change Quicker Than Science Suggested

May 3, 2012 — Tiffany Stecker and ClimateWire

![Climate Change Is Turning Antarctica

Green](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/9E6D4321-2460-4846-BBC0D2D83BAFA04C_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Climate

### Climate Change Is Turning Antarctica Green

May 19, 2017 — Scott Waldman and ClimateWire

![Climate Change May Make Plants More Fragrant](/public/resources/icon__SA-

logo-placeholder--rect-3166a74694258e68c9c9fd6e14c45ff6.jpg)

The Sciences

### Climate Change May Make Plants More Fragrant

February 19, 2010 — Gayathri Vaidyanathan and ClimateWire

Advertisement

## Newsletter

## Get smart. Sign up for our email newsletter.

Sign Up

## Expertise. Insights. Illumination.

Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845,
including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.

Subscribe Now!![Expertise. Insights.

Illumination.](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/D5AF5187-56F7-4844-9937BFECE4B78D53_source.png?w=385&h=375)

Follow us

        
                  * instagram
          * soundcloud
          * youtube
          * twitter
          * facebook
          * rss
        

Scientific american arabic

العربية

        
                  * Store
          * About
          * Press Room
        
          * FAQs
          * Contact Us
          * Site Map
        
          * Advertise
          * SA Custom Media
          * Terms of Use
        
          * Privacy Policy
          * Use of Cookies
          * International Editions
        

Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial
relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found
at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy
of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.

(C) 2019 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc.

All Rights Reserved.

Scroll To Top

![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-403331h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

**You have free article s left.**

* * *

![Temp Paywall

Img](/public/resources/paywall_temp_img-098a5039687a6951d2abc22803855180.jpg)

Support our award-winning coverage of advances in science & technology.

See subscription options

Already a subscriber? Sign in.

You have no free articles left.

Subscribers get more award-winning coverage of advances in science &
technology.

Sign In

See Subscription Options

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

