

FactCheck.org® A Project of The Annenberg Public Policy Center

![Become a Facebook fan](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

facebook-mini.png)

![Follow us on Twitter](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

twitter.png)

![Get the RSS feed](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-rss.png)

![Follow us on Tumblr](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

tumblr.png)

![Sign up for the email

newsletter](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-email.png)

![Help us hold politicians accountable.

](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-donate.png)

Skip to content

FactCheck.org®

  * Home
  * Articles 
    * Featured
    * The Wire
    * SciCheck
    * Debunking False Stories
    * 2018 Election
  * Ask a Question 
    * Ask FactCheck
    * Ask SciCheck
  * Donate
  * Archives 
    * President Trump
    * Nancy Pelosi
    * Mitch McConnell
    * Chuck Schumer
    * Kevin McCarthy
    * 2020 Election
    * Russia investigation
    * climate change
    * immigration
    * View All
  * About Us 
    * Our Mission
    * Our Process
    * Our Funding
    * Our Staff
    * Undergraduate Fellows
    * Awards
    * Request a Correction
    * Contact Us
  * Search
  * More 
    * Viral Claims
    * FactCheck On the Air
    * Mailbag
    * Quiz Archive
    * Party Lines

FactCheck.org is celebrating 15 years of holding politicians accountable.

SciCheck › The Wire

# Does a Fetus Feel Pain at 20 Weeks?

By Dave Levitan

Posted on May 18, 2015

* * *

A number of Republican House members say scientific research proves a 20-week-
old fetus can feel pain. This is a complicated and controversial topic in
science, but the ability to feel pain at that specific point in gestation is
unproven.

The House Republicans made their remarks during a debate on the Pain-Capable
Unborn Child Protection Act, which would ban abortions beyond 20 weeks, with
some exceptions for victims of rape or incest and if the mother's life is in
danger. It passed the House on May 13 by a margin of 242-184.

Several lawmakers made similar statements on the House floor:

> **Rep. Ralph Abraham, May 13:** As a doctor, I know and I can attest that
this bill is backed by scientific research showing that babies can indeed feel
pain at 20 weeks, if not before.

>

> **Rep. Dan Benishek, May 13:** The Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act
will prevent abortions from occurring after the point at which many scientific
studies have demonstrated that children in the womb can actually feel pain.

>

> **Rep. Charles Boustany, May 13:** The scientific evidence is clear: unborn
babies feel pain. They feel pain at 20 weeks post-fertilization.

These statements, and others like them, are problematic because of their
definitive nature. Scientific research on pain in the fetus is extremely
complicated, primarily because pain is a subjective experience and a fetus
cannot indicate if something hurts.

Research on the topic has centered around the stages of brain and nervous
system development, and what is known regarding the processing of pain in the
brain. We reviewed the literature and spoke with several experts, and we
conclude that a firm starting point for pain in the developing fetus is
essentially impossible to pin down, and that definitive claims regarding pain
perception at 20 weeks are unfounded. We take no position on the bill itself.

### **Subjectivity and Evidence Reviews**

Published research generally supports an experience of pain being possible
only later in gestation than 20 weeks. A synthesis of available evidence was
published in the _Journal of the American Medical Association_ in 2005 by
experts from the University of California, San Francisco, and elsewhere, and
their report concluded: "Evidence regarding the capacity for fetal pain is
limited but indicates that fetal perception of pain is unlikely before the
third trimester." The third trimester begins at 27 to 28 weeks from
conception.

The perception of pain requires an awareness of an unpleasant stimulus --
receptors throughout the body must send a signal to the brain, where it can be
processed as pain. One reason the _JAMA_ review finds early pain perception
unlikely is that the connections between the thalamus, a sort of relay center
in the brain, and the cortex have not yet formed. This happens between 23 and
30 weeks gestational age, and the authors argue these connections are a
precursor for pain perception. They also cite studies using
electroencephalography that have shown the capacity for functional pain in
preterm newborns “probably does not exist before 29 or 30 weeks.”

A March 2010 report from the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
in the United Kingdom concluded similarly:

> **RCOG, 2010:** In reviewing the neuroanatomical and physiological evidence
in the fetus, it was apparent that connections from the periphery to the
cortex are not intact before 24 weeks of gestation and, as most
neuroscientists believe that the cortex is necessary for pain perception, it
can be concluded that the fetus cannot experience pain in any sense prior to
this gestation.

The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has agreed with
RCOG's and the JAMA study's findings, writing in 2012 that "[s]upporters of
fetal pain legislation only present studies which support the claim of fetal
pain prior to the third trimester. When weighed together with other available
information, including the JAMA and RCOG studies, supporters’ conclusion does
not stand."

![SciCHECKinsert](https://www.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/2015/01/SciCHECKsquare_4-e1430162915812.png)We
asked several members of Congress for evidence to support the claims regarding
fetal pain at 20 weeks. Abraham's office declined, citing the congressman's
personal experience as a family practice physician. Cole Avery, Abraham's
spokesman, told us in an email that the congressman has "read countless
medical journals and articles during that career that have led him to the
conclusion that babies feel pain at 20 weeks. There's no single article or
fact sheet that led him to this conclusion; he reached it during an entire
career of study."

Others did send materials in support of the claim. Boustany's spokesman sent
us several fact sheets and references that contained numerous citations on
neuroanatomy, development and related topics; one of these is available at
this site, which endorses the idea that pain is experienced at 20 weeks after
fertilization.

For example, Boustany's documentation claimed a 2007 paper in the journal
_Behavioral and Brain Sciences_ "demonstrated evidence that children born
missing virtually all of the cerebral cortex nonetheless experience pain."
That paper, by Swedish neuroscientist Bjorn Merker, was a review of available
evidence regarding "consciousness without a cerebral cortex." It did conclude
that "consciousness," which would include the perception of pain, may reside
not only in the cortex but in other, earlier developing brain regions as well.

In 2013, Merker told the _New York Times_ that his work had only "marginal
bearing" on fetal pain. In fact, his paper, he said, "did not deal with pain
specifically."

The material from Boustany's office also cited a number of papers detailing
that the sensory receptors on the skin begin to appear as early as seven to
eight weeks, and that these are linked by nerve cells to the brain's thalamus
and subcortical plate by 20 weeks. This suggests that pain signals can be
received by a fetus and sent to the brain, where they are processed -- but
only if processing does not actually require a fully developed cerebral
cortex. Some experts have indeed argued that some degree of pain perception
may not require a cortex, but again, there is no way to confirm this in a
fetus.

A common argument, and one also mentioned in Boustany's materials, has to do
with a fetus' response to stimuli. A heel prick from a needle used for
amniocentesis, for example, can result in the fetus recoiling, much as an
adult would to a painful pinprick.

Studies have shown, however, that the recoil is more of a reflex controlled by
the "lower brain" (which is involved with more base functions like breathing
than with consciousness) or the spinal cord and does not necessarily reflect
an experience of pain. In fact, the same response can be seen in anencephalic
infants, who are born missing large parts of the brain. As the _JAMA_ review
explains: "[F]lexion withdrawal from tactile stimuli is a noncortical spinal
reflex exhibited by infants with anencephaly and by individuals in a
persistent vegetative state who lack cortical function."

Put another way, the experience of pain is different from what is known as
nociception. Nociception refers to the body's ability to perceive harm -- this
can be achieved below the level of consciousness, as with reflexes. A paper
published in 2001 in the journal _Bioethics_ explains the difference: "[W]hile
nociception is neural activity, pain is an unpleasant feeling. It follows that
while pain requires some level of consciousness, nociception does not."

### **Pain Intensity and Fetal Viability**

Proponents of 20-week abortion bans often also cite Kanwaljeet Anand, a
professor of pediatrics, anesthesiology and neurobiology at the University of
Tennessee Health Science Center. He has stated that pain may indeed occur in a
fetus, through other neurobiological mechanisms than in an adult, as early as
20 weeks post-fertilization or even before. A claim attributed to him that the
pain perceived is "possibly more intense than that perceived by term newborns"
is repeated often, including during the House floor debate by Rep. Kristi
Noem, a Republican from South Dakota:

> **Noem, May 13:** This is the stage where we know the baby can feel pain,
and could be viable outside the womb with proper care. In fact, there is
evidence that the pain that the unborn baby feels is even more intense than
what a young child or an adult would feel because their nervous system isn 't
developed enough to block that pain.

In testimony before Congress in 2005, however, Anand was specifically asked
about this idea. He responded: "No. There is -- that is not my opinion. And I
really don't have any data to suggest that that could be true, or the other
way." He explained that there is some data suggesting a lower pain threshold
in preterm newborns than in full-term newborns or older children, but
extrapolating that back to the gestation period is not possible.

Anand also told the _New York Times_ in 2013 that he has turned down many
requests to testify in court cases regarding fetal pain, objecting to the
politicization of his research.

Noem also mentioned that a fetus at 20 weeks "could be viable outside the womb
with proper care." Rep. Virginia Foxx, a Republican from North Carolina, also
mentioned this and cited a recent study on extremely preterm infants:

> **Foxx, May 13:** The _New York Times_ reporting just last week on a study
that the New England Journal of Medicine published that found that 25 percent
of children born prematurely at the stage of pregnancy covered by this
legislation survive.

The study in question analyzed the outcomes regarding 4,987 babies born before
27 weeks gestational age.

(It is important to note that gestational age and post-fertilization age are
different. Gestational age, which the study on viability used, is measured
from the mother's last normal menstruation before conception. Post-
fertilization age is the time since conception. Generally, one can add two
weeks to post-fertilization age to calculate an approximate gestational age.
H.R. 36 refers to abortions after 20 weeks post-fertilization age, which is
equivalent to 22 weeks gestational age.)

We asked Foxx's office for clarification, but received no response. We are
unsure to what exactly her 25 percent figure refers.

In the study she referenced, a total of 357 babies were born at 22 weeks
gestational age, and 5.1 percent of them survived; 2.0 percent survived
without moderate or severe impairment. At 23 weeks, the rate rose
substantially, with 23.6 percent surviving overall and 11.3 percent surviving
without impairment. By 26 weeks, most babies survive, at 81.4 percent, and
58.5 percent survive without impairment.

Noem is right that a fetus at 20 weeks post-fertilization -- or 22 weeks
gestational age -- "could be viable outside the womb with proper care." But at
least in one study, only 2 percent of these babies survived without moderate
or severe impairment, and only 5.1 percent survived at all.

Some experts argue, as Anand does, that pain in the fetus is not precisely the
same as in an adult and may occur earlier than 20 weeks. Martin Platt, an
honorary and clinical reader in neonatal and pediatric medicine at Newcastle
University in the U.K. who has criticized arguments against early fetal pain,
told us in an email that "it is now clearly recognized that infants and
preterm babies process pain through different structures than adults, so
'adult based' arguments are not relevant." Still, he said, "we are no closer
to defining a gestational age below which" pain might not be felt.

In his 2011 editorial in the journal _Archives of Diseases in Childhoo_ _d_ ,
Platt stressed the need for better understanding of this complicated issue
before firm proclamations are made:

> **Platt, 2011:** [T]he literature on fetal behaviour, perception,
organisation, movement and responses focuses largely on fetuses above 28 weeks
of gestation, with a relative lack of studies on the fetus between 20 and 24
weeks. This results in too much reliance on neuroscience, too much reference
to animal work, too much extrapolation from both of these and too little real-
world human investigation on which to base a realistic view. No one would deny
that there are important issues to be confronted, but a sensible debate needs
a solid base of rigorous empirical enquiry.

_Editor’s Note: SciCheck is made possible by a grant from the Stanton
Foundation._

_– Dave Levitan_

  * Categories
    * SciCheck
    * The Wire
  * Location
    * National
  * Issue
    * abortion
  * People
    * Charles Boustany
    * Dan Benishek
    * Kristi Noem
    * ralph abraham
    * Virginia Foxx

* * *

Previous StoryO'Malley's Immigration Exaggeration

Next StoryFlackCheck Video: Huckabee Announcement

* * *

##### Ask FactCheck

**Q: Did the comedian Steve Harvey author a post in support of President
Donald Trump circulating on social media?** **  
**

**A: No. It was written by an anonymous, 80-year-old American, according to
the conservative website that first published it in 2016.**

Read the full question and answer

View the Ask FactCheck archives

Have a question? Ask us.

Donate Now

Because facts matter.

![SciCheck](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-scicheck.png)

##### SciCheck

###### Fact-checking science-based claims.

![Facebook Initiative](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

facebook.png)

##### Facebook Initiative

###### Debunking false stories.

![State of the Union](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

sotu.png)

##### State of the Union

###### Our fact-checking video collaboration.

![Trump Transcripts](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

trump.png)

##### Trump Transcripts

###### Annotated transcripts of Trump’s remarks.

![Health Watch](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

healthwatch.png)

##### Health Watch

###### Fact-checking the health care debate.

![2018 Players

Guide](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/PlayersGuide2018-square.png)

##### 2018 Players Guide

###### The special interest groups behind the TV ads.

![Sign Up](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-signup.png)

##### Sign Up

###### Get free email alerts.

![Ask SciCheck](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

askscicheck.png)

##### Ask SciCheck

###### Answers to your science questions.

![Viral Spiral](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

viralspiral.png)

##### Viral Spiral

###### Don’t get spun by internet rumors.

![NewsFeed

Defenders](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/factchecksidebar_icon-1.png)

##### NewsFeed Defenders

###### A media literacy game to detect misinformation.

![On the Air](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-ota.png)

##### On the Air

###### Our staff on TV and radio.

![Party Lines](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-partylines.png)

##### Party Lines

###### Misleading political talking points.

![FlackCheck.org](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-

flackcheck.png)

##### FlackCheck.org

###### Our sister site for political literacy.

![Mailbag](https://cdn.factcheck.org/UploadedFiles/fc-icon-mailbag.png)

##### Mailbag

###### Letters from our readers.

  * Archives
  * Privacy
  * Copyright Policy
  * Contact Us

(C) Copyright 2019 FactCheck.org ®  
A Project of The Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of
Pennsylvania

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

