

Skip to main content

SubscribeMenu

Scientific American

        
                  * Cart 0
          * Sign In Email *:Password *:Forgot password?Login![Loading](/public/resources/loader-eba9d808f62929c2c4c744e562eca7d9.gif)Not yet registered?
          * |Stay Informed
        

SearchSubscribe

Close

SearchClose

Advanced Search

        
                  * The Sciences
          * Mind
          * Health
          * Tech
          * Sustainability
          * Education
          * Video
          * Podcasts
          * Blogs
          * Publications
          * Subscribe
          * Current Issue
          * Cart0
          * Sign In
          * Stay Informed
        
          * Share
          * Latest
        
          *       *       *       * Sustainability
        

# The Role of Sunspots and Solar Winds in Climate Change

Do these natural phenomena have a greater impact on climate change than humans
and industrialization?

        
                  *       * Share on Facebook
        
          * Share on Twitter
        
          * Share on Reddit
        
          * Share on LinkedIn
        
          * Share via
        
          * Print
        

![The Role of Sunspots and Solar Winds in Climate

Change](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/9B6811B7-E5C5-48FA-9E876E06DC371790_source.jpg?w=590&h=800&4E48743D-6DC8-44DB-

AE244BB15659E60E)

Credit: Getty Images

Advertisement

**Dear EarthTalk: Don 't some scientists point to sunspots and solar wind as
having more impact on climate change than human industrial activity?**  
-- _David Noss, California, MD_

Sunspots are storms on the sun's surface that are marked by intense magnetic
activity and play host to solar flares and hot gassy ejections from the sun's
corona. Scientists believe that the number of spots on the sun cycles over
time, reaching a peak--the so-called Solar Maximum--every 11 years or so. Some
studies indicate that sunspot activity overall has doubled in the last
century. The apparent result down here on Earth is that the sun glows brighter
by about 0.1 percent now than it did 100 years ago.

Solar wind, according to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, consists of
magnetized plasma flares and in some cases is linked to sunspots. It emanates
from the sun and influences galactic rays that may in turn affect atmospheric
phenomena on Earth, such as cloud cover. But scientists are the first to admit
that they have a lot to learn about phenomena like sunspots and solar wind,
some of which is visible to humans on Earth in the form of Aurora Borealis and
other far flung interplanetary light shows.

Some skeptics of human-induced climate change blame global warming on natural
variations in the sun's output due to sunspots and/or solar wind. They say
it's no coincidence that an increase in sunspot activity and a run-up of
global temperatures on Earth are happening concurrently, and view regulation
of carbon emissions as folly with negative ramifications for our economy and
tried-and-true energy infrastructure.

"[V]ariations in solar energy output have far more effect on Earth's climate
than soccer moms driving SUVs," Southwestern Law School professor Joerg
Knipprath, writes in his 'Token Conservative' blog. "A rational thinker would
understand that, especially if he or she has some understanding of the limits
of human influence. But the global warming boosters have this unbounded hubris
that it is humans who control nature, and that human activity can terminally
despoil the planet as well as cause its salvation."

Many climate scientists agree that sunspots and solar wind could be playing a
role in climate change, but the vast majority view it as very minimal and
attribute Earth's warming primarily to emissions from industrial activity--and
they have thousands of peer-reviewed studies available to back up that claim.

Peter Foukal of the Massachusetts-based firm Heliophysics, Inc., who has
tracked sunspot intensities from different spots around the globe dating back
four centuries, also concludes that such solar disturbances have little or no
impact on global warming. Nevertheless, he adds, most up-to-date climate
models--including those used by the United Nations' prestigious
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)--incorporate the effects of
the sun's variable degree of brightness in their overall calculations.

Ironically, the only way to really find out if phenomena like sunspots and
solar wind are playing a larger role in climate change than most scientists
now believe would be to significantly reduce our carbon emissions. Only in the
absence of that potential driver will researchers be able to tell for sure how
much impact natural influences have on the Earth's climate.

**CONTACTS** : NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center,
www.solarscience.msfc.nasa.gov; Token Conservative Blog,
www.tokenconservative.com; IPCC, www.ipcc.ch.

**EarthTalk is produced by E/The Environmental Magazine. SEND YOUR
ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTIONS TO:** **EarthTalk** , P.O. Box 5098, Westport, CT
06881; earthtalk@emagazine.com. Read past columns at:
www.emagazine.com/earthtalk/archives.php. **EarthTalk** is now a book! Details
and order information at: www.emagazine.com/earthtalkbook.

## Latest News

![My Next

Chapter](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/E9904C4D-5310-46DA-A478C2678A202DF1_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Policy & Ethics

### My Next Chapter

8 hours ago — Mariette DiChristina

![High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural

Network](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6C243A30-A89D-458F-9FCC9C4A2C2A3537_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Computing

### High School Cheaters Nabbed by Neural Network

9 hours ago — Christopher Intagliata

![Remembering Murray Gell-

Mann](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/23C98019-3DE6-4337-89F367C2E14D7C37_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Physics

### Remembering Murray Gell-Mann

9 hours ago — Stephen Wolfram

![Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S.

Deaths](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/6823A5DF-023E-4E2A-95CF29B7EAB8F0EE_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Climate

### Meeting Climate Targets Would Prevent Thousands of U.S. Deaths

9 hours ago — Chelsea Harvey and E&E News

![Rethinking National

Security](https://static.scientificamerican.com/blogs/cache/file/95DCFB0C-3E0B-46BC-

BACD9D67250A2DF4_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Policy & Ethics

### Rethinking National Security

11 hours ago — Martin E. Hellman

![Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or

Hype?](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/E84422C7-6D55-4610-B755A0DB315E0C52_medium.jpg?w=170&h=113&fit=crop)

Wellness

### Aflatoxins in Nuts: Danger or Hype?

12 hours ago — Nutrition Diva Monica Reinagel

Advertisement

## Newsletter

## Get smart. Sign up for our email newsletter.

Sign Up

## Expertise. Insights. Illumination.

Discover world-changing science. Explore our digital archive back to 1845,
including articles by more than 150 Nobel Prize winners.

Subscribe Now!![Expertise. Insights.

Illumination.](https://static.scientificamerican.com/sciam/cache/file/D5AF5187-56F7-4844-9937BFECE4B78D53_source.png?w=385&h=375)

Follow us

        
                  * instagram
          * soundcloud
          * youtube
          * twitter
          * facebook
          * rss
        

Scientific american arabic

العربية

        
                  * Store
          * About
          * Press Room
        
          * FAQs
          * Contact Us
          * Site Map
        
          * Advertise
          * SA Custom Media
          * Terms of Use
        
          * Privacy Policy
          * Use of Cookies
          * International Editions
        

Scientific American is part of Springer Nature, which owns or has commercial
relations with thousands of scientific publications (many of them can be found
at www.springernature.com/us). Scientific American maintains a strict policy
of editorial independence in reporting developments in science to our readers.

(C) 2019 Scientific American, a Division of Springer Nature America, Inc.

All Rights Reserved.

Scroll To Top

![](//secure-us.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=us-403331h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

**You have free article s left.**

* * *

![Temp Paywall

Img](/public/resources/paywall_temp_img-098a5039687a6951d2abc22803855180.jpg)

Support our award-winning coverage of advances in science & technology.

See subscription options

Already a subscriber? Sign in.

You have no free articles left.

Subscribers get more award-winning coverage of advances in science &
technology.

Sign In

See Subscription Options

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

