

Skip to main content

The Guardian - Back to home

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe Contribute

Search jobs

Sign in My account

        
                  * Comments & replies 
          * Public profile 
          * Account details 
          * Emails & marketing
        

* * *
        
                  * Membership 
          * Contributions 
          * Subscriptions
        

* * *
        
                  * Sign out
        

Search

        
                  * switch to the  International edition 
          * switch to the  UK edition 
          * switch to the  US edition 
          * switch to the  Australia edition
        

current edition: International edition

        
                  * News 
          * Opinion 
          * Sport 
          * Culture 
          * Lifestyle
        

Show More __

        
                  * __News
            * World news 
            * UK news 
            * Science 
            * Cities 
            * Global development 
            * Football 
            * Tech 
            * Business 
            * Environment 
            * Obituaries 
          * __Opinion
            * The Guardian view 
            * Columnists 
            * Cartoons 
            * Opinion videos 
            * Letters 
          * __Sport
            * Football 
            * Cricket 
            * Rugby union 
            * Tennis 
            * Cycling 
            * F1 
            * Golf 
            * US sports 
          * __Culture
            * Books 
            * Music 
            * TV & radio 
            * Art & design 
            * Film 
            * Games 
            * Classical 
            * Stage 
          * __Lifestyle
            * Fashion 
            * Food 
            * Recipes 
            * Love & sex 
            * Health & fitness 
            * Home & garden 
            * Women 
            * Men 
            * Family 
            * Travel 
            * Money
        

What term do you want to search? __ Search with google

        
                  * Make a contribution 
          * Subscribe 
          * __International edition
            * switch to the  UK edition 
            * switch to the  US edition 
            * switch to the  Australia edition 
          * Search jobs 
          * Dating 
          * Holidays 
          * Digital Archive 
          * Discount Codes 
          * The Guardian app 
          * Video 
          * Podcasts 
          * Pictures 
          * Newsletters 
          * Today's paper 
          * Inside the Guardian 
          * The Observer 
          * Guardian Weekly 
          * Crosswords 
          * Facebook 
          * Twitter 
          * Search jobs 
          * Dating 
          * Holidays 
          * Digital Archive 
          * Discount Codes
        
          * Environment 
          * Climate change 
          * Wildlife 
          * Energy 
          * Pollution
        

More

Climate change

This article is more than **6 months old**

# Policies of China, Russia and Canada threaten 5C climate change, study

finds

This article is more than **6 months old**

Ranking of countries’ goals shows even EU on course for more than double safe
level of warming

Jonathan Watts Global environment editor

@jonathanwatts

Fri 16 Nov 2018 10.00 GMT Last modified on Fri 16 Nov 2018 17.25 GMT

        
                  * Share on Facebook
          * Share on Twitter
          * Share via Email
        

![Vendors near a state-owned coal-fired power plant in

China.](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/af048bf9e6feedd70e4d9ab750f019866b39714a/0_241_6720_4032/master/6720.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=c2475926a35cc2afe37eccffc3d9b462)

Vendors near a state-owned coal-fired power plant in China. Photograph: Kevin
Frayer/Getty Images

China, Russia and Canada’s current climate policies would drive the world
above a catastrophic 5C of warming by the end of the century, according to a
study that ranks the climate goals of different countries.

The US and Australia are only slightly behind with both pushing the global
temperature rise dangerously over 4C above pre-industrial levels says the
paper, while even the EU, which is usually seen as a climate leader, is on
course to more than double the 1.5C that scientists say is a moderately safe
level of heating.

The study, published on Friday in the journal Nature Communications, assesses
the relationship between each nation’s ambition to cut emissions and the
temperature rise that would result if the world followed their example.

The aim of the paper is to inform climate negotiators as they begin a two-year
process of ratcheting up climate commitments, which currently fall far short
of the 1.5-to-2C goal set in France three years ago.

Climate equity graphic

The related website also serves as a guide to how nations are sharing the
burden of responding to the greatest environmental threat humankind has ever
faced.

Among the major economies, the study shows India is leading the way with a
target that is only slightly off course for 2C. Less developed countries are
generally more ambitious, in part because they have fewer factories, power
plants and cars, which means they have lower emissions to rein in.

On the opposite side of the spectrum are the industrial powerhouse China and
major energy exporters who are doing almost nothing to limit carbon dioxide
emissions. These include Saudi Arabia (oil), Russia (gas) and Canada, which is
drawing vast quantities of dirty oil from tar sands. Fossil fuel lobbies in
these countries are so powerful that government climate pledges are very weak,
setting the world on course for more than 5C of heating by the end of the
century.

Only slightly better are the group of countries that are pushing the planet
beyond 4C. Among them are the US, which has huge emissions from energy,
industry and agriculture somewhat offset by promises of modest cuts and more
renewables. Australia, which remains heavily dependent on coal exports, is
also in this category.

The wealthy shopping societies of Europe fare slightly better – largely
because emissions on products are calculated at the source of manufacture
rather than the point of consumption – but the authors of the paper say their
actions lag behind their promises to set a positive example.

“It is interesting is to see how far out some countries are, even those that
are considered leaders in the climate mitigation narrative,” said the study’s
author, Yann Robiou du Pont of Melbourne University.

The study is likely to be controversial. Under the Paris agreement, there is
no top-down consensus on what is a fair share of responsibility. Instead each
nation sets its own bottom-up targets according to a number of different
factors, including political will, level of industrialisation, ability to pay,
population size, historical responsibility for emissions. Almost every
government, the authors say, selects an interpretation of equity that serves
their own interests and allows them to achieve a relative gain on other
nations.

To get around these differing concepts of fairness, the paper assesses each
nation by the least stringent standards they set themselves and then
extrapolates this to the world. In doing so, the authors say they can
“operationalise disagreements”.

Taking account of the different interpretations, they say the world needs to
commit to a virtual 1.4C target in order to achieve a 2C goal. They hope their
equity metric can be used in next month’s UN climate talks in Katowice and in
climate litigation cases.

The authors said the study could in future be extended to the subnational
level, such as individual US states. They also note that a few key sectors are
currently omitted, including land-use change (which is fundamental in rapidly
deforesting nations such as Brazil, Argentina and Indonesia), international
shipping and aviation.

![Aerial view of mining activity, at the Pantanal wetlands, in Mato Grosso

state,

Brazil.](https://i.guim.co.uk/img/media/c9530109ba83191da5a52e24a5cc228d6aee5df4/0_186_5568_3341/master/5568.jpg?width=300&quality=85&auto=format&fit=max&s=0f95557ac92f912ab4956f0f8dbe5e85)

Facebook Twitter Pinterest

Brazil is losing large tracts of natural forest to activities such as mining,
logging and agriculture. Photograph: Carl de Souza/AFP/Getty Images

Although the study highlights the huge gap between political will and
scientific alarm, Robiou du Pont said it should inspire rather than dispirit
people.

“The positive outcome of this study is that we have a metric to assess the
ratcheting up of ambition. Civil society, experts and decision-makers can use
this to hold their governments accountable, and possibly undertake climate
litigation cases as happened recently in the Netherlands,” he said. “This
metric translates the lack of ambition on a global scale to a national scale.
If we look at the goal of trying to avoid damage to the Earth, then I am
pessimistic as this is already happening. But this should be a motivation to
ratchet up ambition and avoid global warming as much and as rapidly as
possible. Every fraction of a degree will have a big impact.”

Commenting on the study, other academics said it could be used by anyone to
show how climate action can be navigated in a world in which each country
ranks itself based on what they consider to be fair.

“This paper provides a means for countries to check how their contribution
might be perceived by other countries and thus judge whether they are
perceived as a climate leader or laggard,” said Joeri Rogelj of Imperial
College London.

Topics

        
                  * Climate change
        
          * Greenhouse gas emissions 
          * Paris climate agreement 
          * Coal 
          * Fossil fuels 
          * Energy 
          * Global climate talks 
          * news
        
          * Share on Facebook
          * Share on Twitter
          * Share via Email
          * Share on LinkedIn
          * Share on Pinterest
          * Share on WhatsApp
          * Share on Messenger
        
          * Reuse this content
        

## Most popular

        
                  * Environment 
          * Climate change 
          * Wildlife 
          * Energy 
          * Pollution
        
          * Contact us
          * Complaints & corrections
          * SecureDrop
          * Work for us
          * Privacy policy
          * Cookie policy
          * Terms & conditions
          * Help
          * All topics
          * All writers
          * Digital newspaper archive
          * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * Advertise with us
          * Search UK jobs
          * Dating
          * Discount Codes
        

Support The Guardian

Available for everyone, funded by readers

Contribute Subscribe

Back to top

© 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights
reserved.

Close

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pvg.gif)
![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035250&cv=2.0&cj=1&comscorekw=Climate+change%2CGreenhouse+gas+emissions%2CParis+climate+agreement%2CClimate+change%2CCoal%2CFossil+fuels%2CEnergy%2CEnvironment%2CScience%2CGlobal+climate+talks)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/971225648/?value=0&guid=ON&script=0)

![](//phar.gu-web.net/count/pv.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

