

This site uses cookies to enhance your reading experience. By using this site,
you consent to our use of cookies.Okay

close icon

Skip to contentMobile toggle main menu

Axios

Mobile toggle complementary sections

        
                  * Newsletters
        

Sign up for Axios AMAll newsletters

        
                  * Sections
        

Top StoriesTechnologyPoliticsBusinessHealth CareScienceAutonomous
VehiclesFutureEnergyWorld

        
                  * Special Features
        

Smarter FasterFacts MatterAxios VisualsPro Rata PodcastAxios on HBO

        
                  * More
        

NewslettersEventsAboutContact NewsroomSearchPrivacy & TermsAdvertise With Us

Search

### Latest Stories

### Latest Stories

#### Biden flips on support for Hyde Amendment

2 hours ago / Politics

#### Federal government opens new holding facility for migrant children

3 hours ago / Politics

#### DOJ rejects House Dems' request for census documents

3 hours ago / Politics

#### How a higher minimum wage could help Walmart

4 hours ago / Future

#### The only furniture you need

4 hours ago / Future

#### Axios Future: Trade war president — Walmart and wages — Furniture you

need

4 hours ago / Newsletters

#### NBA suspends Warriors minority owner after incident with Raptors player

5 hours ago / U.S. News

#### How Sudan's pro-democracy uprising was beaten back

5 hours ago / World

#### Press freedom is eroding around the world

5 hours ago / World

#### Axios Dashboard

Featured / U.S. News

#### A map of the entire night sky in X-rays

5 hours ago / Science

#### Desperation and danger in the Gulf for South Asia’s migrant workers

5 hours ago / World

#### Scientists watch a new planet form

5 hours ago / Science

#### Axios World: Migrant workers exploited — D-Day photos — Ebola latest —

Press freedom, mapped

5 hours ago / Newsletters

#### Microplastics lurk in the deep sea

6 hours ago / Science

#### Senate draft resolution challenges Netanyahu on West Bank annexation

6 hours ago / World

#### Axios Science: Microplastics lurking in the deep — Moons in distant space

— Ebola "reset"

6 hours ago / Newsletters

#### NYPD: Actions at Stonewall Riots were "discriminatory and oppressive"

6 hours ago / Politics

#### In contrast to others, WHO offers cautious hope on Ebola outbreak

6 hours ago / Science

#### Endurance athletes have a set energy limit

7 hours ago / Science

#### Season 2 of “Axios on HBO” airs Sundays at 6pm ET/PT. Keep up to date

with Axios AM:

Email

![](https://images.axios.com/5ZJurcNBYN-

WcTqTt8F3kiQBf9U=/2019/05/31/1559332157571.jpg)Close

Stories

![](https://images.axios.com/uGnYLbfr-

OfWV77LQrIbnPhlq-I=/151x0:479x328/52x0/2018/06/26/1530035090726.jpg)Amy
HarderAug 21, 2017

Column / Harder Line

# What liberals get wrong about climate change

![](https://images.axios.com/8xyXMuXE6J_r1ZjwZXaB4PNJcEk=/1920x1080/smart/2017/12/15/1513304922937.jpg)

Rebecca Zisser / Axios

Democrats and environmental groups too often let their ideological agendas get
in the way of addressing climate change.

**My thought bubble:** Republicans are the bigger sinners in this debate
because most of them refuse to acknowledge that climate change and humans'
role driving it is a real thing, as I wrote in my column last week. The left
faces an inherently different and trickier problem than the right's rejection
of the science: Their tactics and messaging are hobbling their push to address
climate change.

**To be sure,** "the left" is broad and diverse, so much of what I say here
can't apply to each and every elected Democrat or environmental group. Looking
at the left broadly though, I see three big problems with their approach.

**1. Renewables-only mindset**

Beltway Democrats and green groups have increasingly backed renewables at the
expense of technologies that economic modeling says will be needed to tackle
climate change to the extent scientists say is needed.

This includes carbon-free nuclear power, technology that captures carbon
emissions from power plants and other industrial facilities and even natural
gas, a fossil fuel that burns 50% cleaner than coal and helps balance out wind
and solar when it's not windy or sunny.

> "There is denialism on the left that is different than denialism on the
right," said Josh Freed, vice president of clean energy at Third Way, a
centrist think tank. "It ignores data that is inconvenient to ideology."

We've seen this play out most prominently during the Democratic presidential
primary race between Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders. Clinton moved left,
seeking to match her opponent's progressive policies. Then-President Obama
also tacked more toward renewables and against natural gas in his last years
in office.

Some Democrats are beginning to call out environmental groups for not backing
nuclear power, while cautious support is slowly building for carbon capture
technology. These shifts are subtle and often get drowned out by vocal critics
of these positions.

In an op-ed a couple weeks ago, Rep. James Clyburn, the No. 3 Democrat in the
House, said his state may need to increase its fossil-fuel dependence in the
wake of construction on two new nuclear reactors being halted.

"For some reason, most environmental groups that demand action on climate
change were rather muted as the pitched battle over the efficacy of this
project raged on, and a few groups have even cheered the shutdown," Clyburn
wrote.

Several environmental groups and liberal Democrats have backed legislation,
recently introduced by moderate Democrat Sen. Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota,
ramping up expiring tax credits for carbon capture technology. But the most
influential grassroots environmental groups, like the Sierra Club and 350.org,
are not supporters.

**2. Messaging that alienates**

Many climate activists, aided by left-leaning media coverage, paint doomsday
scenarios and call for unrealistic policy prescriptions that are ineffective
at raising concern among people not already worried about climate change.

A recent example of this was the highly cited July New York magazine article
by David Wallace-Wells, "The Uninhabitable Earth," which was criticized by
some of the most vocal climate scientists as being over-the-top and
inaccurate.

Activist and 350.org founder Bill McKibben also recently wrote in Rolling
Stone that the only way to tell if lawmakers are committed to climate change
is if they oppose all fossil fuels in support of renewables. He has a point
that widely adopting natural gas won't help curb global carbon emissions in
the long-run to the levels scientists say are needed, but demanding such a
high bar will turn off more politicians than it will convince.

Some on the left say that conservatives are still denying climate change if
they don't adopt the common progressive mindset that climate change is not
only real, but the world's biggest problem that needs urgent, sweeping
government action.

That's a black and white construct unfit for a complicated, scientific, policy
problem with implications stretching centuries. It also won't convince anyone.
The debate stemming from the Charlottesville tragedy is black and white.
Climate change is not.

**3. Seeking perfection when good is enough**

Democrats and environmentalists often seek to build large, diverse coalitions
to push climate policies that end up being a vehicle for a hodgepodge of
varied issues. Then they crumble under their own weight.

We saw that last year in Washington state when a carbon tax ballot measure
failed. Social justice and environmental groups opposed it because they wanted
the revenue to be used for particular projects, like renewable energy and mass
transit.

Then-President Obama's top climate adviser, Carol Browner, also said recently
that the 2010 climate bill that Congress considered might have passed if it
was smaller.

This country is a long ways from debating concrete proposals again, so I'll
save a fuller debate on this part for another time.

Share on FacebookShare on TwitterShare on LinkedIn

Copy permalink to your clipboard

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

