

Real Science

"Science is the belief in the ignorance of the experts" - Richard Feynman

![](https://stevengoddard.files.wordpress.com/2010/09/cropped-dorothytoto-

jpg.jpg)

Skip to content

        
                  * Home
          * 1871 Climate Superstition
          * 1970s Global Cooling Scare
          * About
          * Alterations To Climate Data
          * Bad Weather
          * Below350.org
          * Climate Racketeering
          * CRU Temperature Fraud
          * Data Tampering At USHCN/GISS
          * GHCN Code
          * Glacial Retreat Before 1910
          * Greenland Meltdown
          * Hansen - The Climate Chiropractor
          * Hide The Decline
          * Historical References
          * Ice Free Arctic Forecasts
          * Maps and Graphs
          * NASA Sea Level Fraud
          * Northwest Passage
          * Polar Meltdown
          * Predictions By The World's Greatest Scientists
          * Spectacularly Poor Climate Science At NASA
          * The Bottom Line
          * The Definitive Data On The Global Warming/Climate Change Scam
          * The Holocaust Began With Gun Control - After A Shooting
          * Tips And Suggestions
          * Tracking Climate Fraud
          * USHCN Code
          * Who Is Steven Goddard?
        

# Who Is Steven Goddard?

My name is Tony Heller. I am a whistle blower. I am an independent thinker who
is considered a heretic by the orthodoxy on both sides of the climate debate.

I live in Columbia, Maryland - an amazing city where I can ride my bicycle
everywhere through the forest, and never need to get in a car.

I am a lifelong environmentalist. I testified at my first Congressional
subcommittee hearing at age 15 in Kanab, Utah, in support of a wilderness area
- very close to the one which President Obama recently set aside. I worked to
get the Clean Air Act passed. I worked as a volunteer wilderness ranger for
two summers in the Cibola and Santa Fe National Forests in New Mexico. I
worked on the Safety Analysis Report for DOE's nuclear waste disposal site in
New Mexico. I probably have the smallest electricity bill in Columbia,
Maryland because I am very careful not to waste. I have never turned on my
heat or air conditioning.

I have degrees in Geology and Electrical Engineering, and worked on the design
team of many of the world's most complex designs, including some which likely
power your PC or Mac. I have worked as a contract software developer on
climate and weather models for the US government.

I do not receive any funding other than small donations on my blog, which have
worked out well below minimum wage. I have tried to obtain funding, but
skeptics with money are terrified of political attacks directed by the White
House and/or being targeted by the IRS. They openly state this to me.

My position on global warming:

The claims of 97% consensus are a massive lie. Only 52% of American
Meteorological Society members believe that man is the primary contributor to
global warming.

The radiative transfer models used by government climate scientists show that
going up to 550 PPM or even 1000 PPM CO2 will make minimal difference to the
radiative balance of the atmosphere. The knee of the CO2 curve is at about 30
PPM, and additional CO2 has little first order effect. This is because almost
all radiation in the CO2 absorption spectra is already being absorbed by H2O
or CO2 molecules. Adding more CO2 has minimal effect, because there is not
much radiation left to be absorbed. (This is a bit of an oversimplification
because of second order effects, but those are also small.) There is no
indication from the radiative transfer models used by government scientists
that additional CO2 will cause large amounts of heating.

The temperature record of both the US and the world has been massively altered
since older versions, almost invariably to create the appearance of more
warming, and in some cases to create warming where there is none.

Sea level has been rising for 20,000 years, and is now 400 feet higher than it
was when the first humans walked to North America from Asia across the Bering
Strait. Most of the apparent sea level rise on the US East Coast is due to the
land sinking, not sea level rising. There has been little or no sea level rise
on the West Coast.

The weather is not getting more severe. Since President Obama took office,
there have been three US hurricane strikes - the fewest of any presidency.
While Grover Cleveland was president in the 1880's, the US was hit by twenty-
six hurricanes. The US is currently experiencing its longest period since the
1860's without a major (category 3-5) hurricane strike. The last one was Wilma
in 2005.

Florida is currently experiencing the longest period on record without a
hurricane strike. The US tornado count over the past two years has been the
lowest in the modern record.

America's worst forest fires occurred in 1871, when thousands of people burned
to death in horrific firestorms around the Great Lakes - on the same day that
Chicago burned to the ground.

Is climate change real?

Climate is cyclical and is always changing. People always imagine that they
live in the worst of times, as this 1871 article from the Brisbane Courier
states.

> ![BkV2czHCQAEkDE0

\(1\)](https://stevengoddard.files.wordpress.com/2014/06/bkv2czhcqaekde0-1.png?w=640)

>

> 10 Jan 1871 - IMAGINARY CHANGES OF CLIMATE. (Pall Mall Gazette.)

If you want to learn more about climate history, I have assembled a large
collection of old newspaper articles about the weather below 350 PPM CO2. If
you read through this, you will understand that lowering CO2 will not make the
weather any better, or worse.

I am more than happy to debate anyone who feels up to the challenge, including
the President of The United States. Science works through research and debate
- not censorship, propaganda, faith, or intimidation.

Advertisements

### Share this:

        
                  * Email
          * Print
          * Twitter
          * Facebook
          * Reddit
          * ### Like this:
        

Like Loading...

### 204 Responses to _Who Is Steven Goddard?_

        
                  1. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d2ea3428419c01dfdea9d25dbc5ad29a?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Andy Oz says:
        

June 27, 2014 at 1:06 pm

Bravo Tony.

Reply

        
                  2. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ab7c3c93c16aefb8f2c3bdf5c2bef66e?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) darrylb says:
        

June 28, 2014 at 12:36 am

There might be more of us than you realize- My background is in physics, math,
chem and after having only a cursory idea of what was happening I actually was
challenged (by my daughter) to prove it. I am from southern MN and there is
not as much ideology here, but a few college profs who counter me in the
newspaper.  
Best Wishes--If you were ever traveling through southern Mn and wanted an all
inclusive place to stay, leave a note on real science and I would contact you.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://i0.wp.com/graph.facebook.com/v2.2/552108879/picture?q=type%3Dlarge%26_md5%3D75532dd707937b9e5a94ebcee53eaff5&resize=40%2C40) Matthew Petersen says:
        

February 23, 2015 at 2:18 am

Hey- I'm at MNSU Mankato 🙂 Are you nearby?

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/28db919ee8d9847f8aee7bc1ffc67954?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) aamichael666 says:
        

September 1, 2015 at 8:07 am

When UNESCO curricula have penetrated even the minds of your own daughter, I
totally understand the outrage. This is a religion pure and simple, and with
the Pope towing the line now, it should be quite apparent to even the most
hardened band-wagon passenger.

As a 33yr old Australian, I had this religion hammered into me in school, but
I seem to be one of the few who value personal exploration of facts over
'consensus' announcements. I became a data analyst for primarily financial
data, and when I heard about the Michael Mann hockey stick model that produced
warming when even red noise was added as input data, I was outraged. The NOAA
and NASA data sets being 'historically cooled' to prove warming, is Orwellian
in the extreme, and it just goes to prove how intense the psychological factor
at play in this cult is when tenured 'scientists' can stare the public in the
eyes, and claim scientific method.

One does not even have to be a climate scientist to first hand observe and
prove for ones self that the 'science' is no science at all - my simple data
analysis skills have served me well to identify raw fraud - and that a Global
Government must be the intention. If the UN are given Sovereignty over the
entire atmosphere at PARS 2015, we are basically consigning Nations to the
dustbin of history, and elevating an international bureaucracy to sanction any
planetary satrapy which it disagrees with on any issue what-so-ever. The UN is
even using the listing of the Great Barrier Reef as 'in danger' if our current
Conservative government does not start playing ball with this fraud … which is
international blackmail that Obama and Cameron are partaking in.

God help us all, because all of the Gen-Y's in my country are running around
shouting Climate Action Now like they are part of a Jim Jones cult on the
Green Cool-aid. They're all denouncing 'capitalism' as the problem in my
country at present, and the hurdles of the current govt seem overwhelmingly
stacked against our future. It's like a reverse-color-revolution, claiming a
color; green … a global coup against all logic and progress to actually bring
people OUT of poverty.

Reply

        
                  3. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/3da58bb741f888ee853f2c986b108f42?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Stephen Richards says:
        

June 28, 2014 at 11:27 am

$50 dollars to keep you going from an old retired physicist, SW contractor and
project manager.

Reply

        
                  4. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/32f3a495a6af90968f82e7b50cd57e70?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) WindStrider says:
        

June 28, 2014 at 9:09 pm

Love you man.  
You'll be remembered as a man who stod up for the truth, Mann will be
remembered as the little fat guy that earned a lot of money on lies.

Reply

        
                  5. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

June 29, 2014 at 3:12 pm

Being right has never guaranteed a good income but there are psychological
benefits. Imagine what it's like to be Mann or Hansen and wake up every
morning facing another day of propping up fraudulent science. Blech.

Reply

        
                  6. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/45f4d166665e483cd1982150d91ca7a4?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Kalianni says:
        

June 29, 2014 at 8:44 pm

An excellent fiction book on this subject is "State of Fear" by Michael
Crighton. The writing is fiction, however he has many old graphs and data and
where to find them in the book and the appendix. Including some that were
taken down after this book was published.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a30b0e3acacb5d9ed26e3229df2f9604?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jdseanjd says:
        

November 6, 2014 at 1:33 pm

You're right, the book is an excellent introduction to the global warming
scam, especially for non-scientists like myself. It is deservedly a best
seller, but his name is spelled Crichton, to make it easier for people to
find.  
It's worth mentioning that he was a qualified medical doctor, testified before
Congress, was responsible for the popular TV program ER, & wrote other best
sellers such as Jurassic Park etc.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/129862a2cd262c52e7adb9a4ffd53f31?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Dick Cobus says:
        

November 6, 2014 at 2:17 pm

I remember reading "State of Fear" when it first came out; I checked the
graphs immediately and they were as Mr. Crighton (Crichton) stated, however,
once the book began to increase in popularity the graphs were altered and very
soon thereafter taken down.  
It is important to note that the CO2 levels, (reported by junk science) is
increasing at approximately the rate of the world population growth,
1.4%/year!!!!! Fascinating!  
Further, is difficult to get actual numbers, as in the recent "Annual Report"
on global warming published on the Weather Channel, you get a lot of verbal
"fear mongering", but little if any actual facts.

Reply

        
                  7. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7146bb0fc93b266afd6ca74ededdb8a0?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) talldave2 says:
        

June 30, 2014 at 4:50 pm

I'm going to keep calling you Steve 🙂

Reply

        
                  8. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/dc75de15e9110bc615536ac36b3042df?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) David Griffith says:
        

July 2, 2014 at 4:43 pm

Regarding hurricane strikes, you seem to have left out Hurricane Ike in 2008.
Still thanks for the hard work.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

July 2, 2014 at 4:44 pm

Obama wasn't president in 2008

Reply

        
                  9. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/dc75de15e9110bc615536ac36b3042df?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) David Griffith says:
        

July 2, 2014 at 4:51 pm

True, but it did occur more recently than Wilma listed as the last strike at
the end of the paragraph and it confused me as to when this post was made

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

July 2, 2014 at 4:55 pm

Wilma was the last major (category 3-5) US hurricane strike. Ike was a
category 2 at US landfall.

Reply

        
                  10. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fe88b7c753de80d7b9ef8c82959e2d3b?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) bv says:
        

July 2, 2014 at 7:19 pm

http://www.cbsnews.com/news/physicist-offers-30000-reward-to-disprove-climate-
change/  
make some money

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

July 2, 2014 at 7:21 pm

Everyone believes that humans influence the climate. Please take your mindless
straw man somewhere else.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fabb7333d1ec9d91ebdf15a57957a6de?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) James Lemery says:
        

July 7, 2014 at 4:12 pm

"I am more than happy to debate anyone who feels up to the challenge… " Your
words Mr. Goodard. What's the matter, not up to the challenge after all?

Reply

        
                        * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

July 7, 2014 at 4:16 pm

I have no idea what you are referring to. But feel free to rant.

        
                        * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/097a24a2be7bbe74de75279f52b41cae?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Florida Jim says:
        

July 27, 2014 at 2:32 pm

In defense of Mr. Goddard, it takes significant money to participate in a
proper debate, or trial, of this magnitude, including travel money, hotel,
etc. You can be sure the physicist would show up with expensive fancy 3D
animations and maybe even multimillionaire Al Gore to create a media circus.
The prize offerer knows this and that the dogs of dogma will attack any
scientist who shows up in support of Mr. Goddard. Lonely go the brave.

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/371abab43bd38d6d5787b08cf23ce78f?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Sheikh says:
        

July 27, 2014 at 1:13 pm

Here are your words from above: "I am more than happy to debate anyone who
feels up to the challenge, including the President of The United States.
Science works through research and debate – not censorship, propaganda, faith,
or intimidation."

I am new to your site, and you had me keenly interested until I read: "Please
take your mindless straw man somewhere else."

Somewhere else is where I am headed.

Reply

        
                        * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

July 28, 2014 at 5:04 pm

Labeling something a straw man argument is perfectly fair. If you feel it was
NOT a straw man, then explain. That's how debate works. Perhaps you might
start by looking up what a straw man argument is.

        
                        * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d78e9baf2ac67f643c83c3ac6d52becf?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Aphan says:
        

July 30, 2014 at 8:22 pm

Steven Goddard/Tony Heller understands that humans influence the climate. He's
never stated otherwise. Only a moron who doesn't know what Steven/Tony thinks
on the subject would even suggest that he engage in a debate attempting to
prove something he doesn't believe?

I'm glad you headed elsewhere as clearly you are not capable of gathering
information before you rush to judgements or following even a short exchange
and representing it accurately.

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/757819cab8c1fd464dae84a0a41eb1b1?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Penny Robinson Fan Club says:
        

October 31, 2014 at 12:35 am

First define your dispositive data set. That's how science are work.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fce611c6f7c2b5d27662c483000a92bf?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) RH says:
        

November 13, 2015 at 11:40 am

I'll pay a hundred trillion dollars if you can prove, using scientific method,
that God does not exist.

Reply

        
                  11. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d9da336f7c3de4fb8ded10caac244c69?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry Gorline says:
        

July 2, 2014 at 9:39 pm

You are the Real Life Hero, good call on the zombie stations. The increased
Tmin trend in the USHCN is most likely the result of contamination from
urbanization, land-use changes that disrupt the normal decoupling of the
nocturnal boundary layer, changes that prevent the formation of a shallow
layer of cooler air near the surface, resulting in warmer surface Tmin, not
the GHG fingerprint asserted by SkS. All the Best, JerryG

Reply

        
                  12. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/9ce4cbb926b9f8e20aaf54c00177f495?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) hazze says:
        

July 4, 2014 at 11:42 pm

Thete are sane people out there with the same ideas as you put up…but..you do
it without surplus shit..its clean arrows..and you do it with humor…thats why
your blog is the best..we cant thank you enough.

Reply

        
                  13. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cf3368e4854da1c33ef590439df56e6b?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) JSBurch says:
        

July 13, 2014 at 7:14 pm

Thanks for your efforts Mr. Heller. You are shedding light on areas I thought
looked suspicious too. The temperature records set in the 1930's seemed to
contradict what the GW crowd said of more recent periods as being the hottest
on record. Well done.

Reply

        
                  14. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/765657cbe8a657f57d1a71e4c7da9d57?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Big Daddy says:
        

July 27, 2014 at 4:18 pm

80 years is insignificant when it comes to measuring climate cycles. It would
fall more under the catagory of weather. Climate takes place on a much larger
time frame of Geologic Time. For example; The last Glacial Maximum ( LGM )
took place 20,000 years ago. Scince then, the continental Glacier wich
extended from greenland south to St. louis and from the the north atlantic
shore to the great pacific northwest up to Alaska. The continental Glacier
melted to the extent that only about 1% of the continental glacier remains
itoday in isolated,disassocited,tatters and remenants virtually unrecognizable
in ice age terms.Further, This 20,000 yr warming trend is characterized by
periods of rapid rates of deglaciaiton;periods of extremely slow deglaciation;
and even periods of reglaciation under the much larger 20,000 year warming
trend. In Geologice time 80 yrs, 100 yrs, 200 yrs is a nano-second of brevity
wich can barely constitute a trend in the larger context of geologic time.
Here is a movie of the modeled deglaciation of north america in the last
20,000 years. It is interesting to note that virtually 99% of the virtual
deglaciation of North america takes place prior to the industrial revolution
and in absence of any anthropogenic forces much larger than a camp fire.

From an even larger perspective of geologic time ,in the 4.5 billion year
history of the earth it is interesting to note that Polar Ice and Glaciers on
the planet earth occupies such a small amount of time as to almost be an
asteric in the history of the earth. This is to say that the absence of Polar
Ice and glaciation on earth is the " Norm " for the exceedingly vast majority
of the Earth's 4.5 billion year history. Further, In absence of any climactic
factors of hemispheric or global proportion wich would not only interrupt the
warming trend of the last 20,000 years but change to a trend of significant
cooling, it is predictable that the tiny amounts of fragmental glaciation in
north america and indeed globally will totally disappear thereby reuniting the
earths conditions to its long standing historical norm of an Earth without
Polar Ice and glaciation.

Modeled Deglaciation Of North America: Movie:
http://www.physics.mun.ca/~lev/glacmov.html

Again, 99% of the deglaciation of north america occurs prior to the industrial
revolution. This is all one needs to know to dismiss the anthropogenic climate
change kooks.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d254e05aa91669cb1126912d1679fce9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Egor TheOne says:
        

December 19, 2014 at 11:46 pm

Very informative and well put !!

Reply

        
                  15. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/016d6d209b14bd3fbe3fbc0c0fde216a?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) RNAngel says:
        

July 27, 2014 at 5:39 pm

I have enjoyed reading your articles. Just curious… Why do you refer yourself
to Steven Goddard? Your critics have seized on this.

Reply

        
                  16. ![](https://i1.wp.com/graph.facebook.com/100000461271056/picture?q=type%3Dlarge%26_md5%3D7aa7b703bf74474868ebf42e7f98e17d&resize=40%2C40) Tom Moran says:
        

August 2, 2014 at 2:08 pm

Thank you for what you do. I enjoyed your talk at ICCC9 in Vegas.

Reply

        
                  17. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/5d5394835825f9f4f852255ab69e14ec?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) QuebecCity Oliver says:
        

August 3, 2014 at 3:42 pm

Good to see that you have finally come out of the closet (so to speak).

It gives one hope, that maybe one day you will accept the evidence.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

August 5, 2014 at 12:15 am

After 25 years of believing global warming BS, I finally accepted the evidence
about a decade ago

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/28db919ee8d9847f8aee7bc1ffc67954?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) aamichael666 says:
        

September 1, 2015 at 8:24 am

Did you feel dirty? … even a little raped? I did. I'm 33yrs old and ALL I was
taught in regards to climate at a state school in Australia was that CO2 was
the main driver of the climate. And they say here that state schools are
'secular'. This is a religion pure and simple, and thank you for your vocal
dissent. We are all sure to burned at the stake as heretics against Green
Buddha. Obama said at the Alaska 2015 conference a few days ago that 'Any
leader who denies the science is not fit to lead': whilst standing next to the
Secretary of State John Kerry, who is always present for official Obama
warming alarmist fests I have noticed. Secretary of State is domain of Foreign
Policy I believe? Meaning this was an open threat against any Nation like
Australia currently resisting this tyranny. Harper in Canada is sure to be the
next victim of the slow reverse-color-revolution sweeping the globe.

Reply

        
                  18. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/37e0f8e2cf1394974819627d863c1ffe?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) A.smith says:
        

August 6, 2014 at 12:28 pm

If your weather turns humid in MD for a long while, I'd suggest you break down
and use some a/c or you'll be wiping the mold off your walls. If you end up
wiping mold…. Use borax.

Reply

        
                  19. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/41af0c5112e74122eceef28a1ae6aa22?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Stuart says:
        

August 12, 2014 at 4:20 pm

You may have some fun with this, especially if the freeze begins early:
http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/franklin-search-jim-balsillie-warship-all-part-
of-largest-effort-yet-to-find-lost-ships-1.2729480

Reply

        
                  20. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/41af0c5112e74122eceef28a1ae6aa22?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Stuart says:
        

August 12, 2014 at 4:22 pm

And this is a great read with lots of historical information about the quest
for the Northwest Passage and the race to reach the North Pole…
http://www.amazon.com/The-Arctic-Grail-Northwest-1818-1909/dp/1585741167

Reply

        
                  21. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6aae2d21c72479a960fe02a1927ca927?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) John M says:
        

August 18, 2014 at 8:59 pm

Steve/Tony:  
Wasn't sure where to post this to get it to you, but wanted to let you know
that on CSPAN today (8/18), Dan Ashe, Director of the US Fish and Wildlife
Service, just testified in a Senate hearing that he doesn't think the "pause"
in temperatures exists, and that temperatures have NOT Flatlined. This was
under questioning from Senator Roger Wicker of Ms. The hearing was titled,
"Impact of climate change on Wildlife and Agriculture".

I hope you get the transcripts and do a story on this and use Dan Ashes
quotes.

Thanks,

John

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

August 18, 2014 at 9:14 pm

The US is having one of the coldest years on record. His fish are freezing

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6aae2d21c72479a960fe02a1927ca927?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) John M says:
        

August 18, 2014 at 9:31 pm

I find it amazing that the heads of very powerful federal agencies don't even
believe the temps have "paused" or gone flat the last 15 years or so, when
many of the leading alarmists have acknowledged it, including Hansen and
others.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/6aae2d21c72479a960fe02a1927ca927?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) John M says:
        

August 19, 2014 at 12:46 am

I forgot to mention earlier that Dan Ashe, after denying that temperatures are
not rising presently, attempted to offer up a scientific explanation/basis for
his beliefs. That's why I hope you review the transcript and expose how
ridiculous his assertions are.

Reply

        
                  22. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a5e28079f67076ca1c5834b6bab873bc?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) David says:
        

August 19, 2014 at 1:39 pm

Did you catch this article: http://wattsupwiththat.com/2014/08/19/revising-
the-sunspot-number/

Now they are changing the raw sun spot data as well because it isn't
cooperating with their political agenda.

Reply

        
                  23. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/63b8531d1954d92671c480fa651c2def?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Mike says:
        

August 27, 2014 at 7:57 pm

Yawn.  
http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/aug/26/global-warming-
irreversible-un-panel-report

Reply

        
                  24. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f3c317b56e0d5a80564c161e767032d5?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Brad Anderson says:
        

August 28, 2014 at 8:52 am

I am a meteorologist and I am a skeptic or realist. Thanks for the research
and the old newspaper articles. I enjoy showing them to my alarmist friends.
Keep up the good work.

Reply

        
                  25. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1d0a3ce838fd495607f8684c66088507?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Chris says:
        

September 1, 2014 at 7:22 pm

Tony, could you please show evidence that additional CO2 concentrations have
minimal effect on temperatures as you have stated? I agree that the middle of
the absorption band gets saturated at modest CO2 levels…but the absorption
band continues to get wider as levels increase - and this is rather important
in the H2O window where CO2 is most effective.

"The radiative transfer models used by government climate scientists show that
going up to 550 PPM or even 1000 PPM CO2 will make minimal difference to the
radiative balance of the atmosphere. The knee of the CO2 curve is at about 30
PPM, and additional CO2 has little first order effect. This is because almost
all radiation in the CO2 absorption spectra is already being absorbed by H2O
or CO2 molecules. Adding more CO2 has minimal effect, because there is not
much radiation left to be absorbed. (This is a bit of an oversimplification
because of second order effects, but those are also small.) There is no
indication from the radiative transfer models used by government scientists
that additional CO2 will cause large amounts of heating."

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

September 2, 2014 at 5:59 am

https://stevengoddard.wordpress.com/2014/06/14/time-to-put-the-climate-
sensitivity-scam-to-bed/

Reply

        
                  26. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/44ad17d90153bc50dda057d351a3d437?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) ralphchapman313 says:
        

September 2, 2014 at 9:37 pm

I will take help here from anyone. I cannot find the blog in which you said
this, and I have tried it out on friends who are plenty smart, and none of us
gets it. Can you please tell me what you were referring to when you said:
'Faced with a series of very cold winters, climate experts decided to make up
some bullshit about missing ice in the Eastern Arctic causing Rossby waves,
which made thething of the past fall in the deep south.' Just the last ten
words.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

September 3, 2014 at 11:33 am

http://www.atheistnexus.org/group/climate-concerns/forum/topics/rossby-waves-
what-happens-in-the-arctic-doesn-t-stay-in-the?xg_source=activity

Reply

        
                  27. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f545e03d528aa98f8b450d0efb03a717?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) fred says:
        

September 7, 2014 at 12:07 am

can one write a letter to steve goddard?

Reply

        
                  28. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/5a006aef0a0931fe3ad64877c746a798?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) James says:
        

September 8, 2014 at 8:10 pm

Just wait. When the earth temperature wil rise up to 2 deg celcius, your
unprofessional website wil look like a piece of dog shit in the street of L.A.  
Dear reader, read please also scientfic journal as : Nature, Scientific
America, !…before you make opinion, be critic also with this website

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

September 10, 2014 at 4:00 pm

Ah yes, the fervor of the true believer, happy with his brainwashed dogma and
content that his blind faith will earn him praise in Gaia afterlife.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/757819cab8c1fd464dae84a0a41eb1b1?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Penny Robinson Fan Club says:
        

October 31, 2014 at 12:38 am

Ah, a sophisticated leftist intellectual at his best!

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b1d559827fdbce0482acf7e97ac13160?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Doogie says:
        

November 10, 2014 at 2:27 am

The grammar and spelling seem pretty unsophisticated to me but maybe they're
considered top-notch in the world of the Left.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d254e05aa91669cb1126912d1679fce9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Egor TheOne says:
        

December 29, 2014 at 9:11 am

Another Hallelujah of Hysteria ……….The CAGW dead horse keeps getting flogged
!!!

Reply

        
                  29. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/5a006aef0a0931fe3ad64877c746a798?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) James says:
        

September 8, 2014 at 8:14 pm

Your comment is awating moderation…..you filter any critic. Piece of shit !  
En how much Exxon is paying you to say scientifics lies…..

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

September 10, 2014 at 12:34 pm

You seem to be a world class douche bag

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

September 10, 2014 at 4:02 pm

Ironically, the douche bag industry is a major contributor to Global Warming.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/757819cab8c1fd464dae84a0a41eb1b1?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Penny Robinson Fan Club says:
        

October 31, 2014 at 12:39 am

Try to keep a civil tongue in your head, maybe, instead of spouting off
juvenile vulgarities.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d254e05aa91669cb1126912d1679fce9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Egor TheOne says:
        

December 29, 2014 at 9:16 am

The CAGW "True B'lverism " Is strong with You !

Reply

        
                  30. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4684524cce9b23385c5cffdfcd07e17c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Joe Pomykala says:
        

September 12, 2014 at 8:26 am

Here is Bill Maher link " 'I Am Much More Afraid of Ice [Melting]… Than I Am
About ISIS' " which you may like  
http://www.cnsnews.com/video/newsbusters/bill-maher-i-am-much-more-afraid-ice-
melting-i-am-about-isis-0 , you can probably get an original link and cut to
the quote on ice being more a worry than ISIL.  
… Kerry, H. Clinton at Dept. of State same in speeches as most important issue
while Middle East is falling apart and people getting beheaded, scary, but
guess Halloween is just around corner, but not funny scary the ways these
people think.

Reply

        
                  31. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/2248449d64898b66f2b83d9eb695e568?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Peter says:
        

September 16, 2014 at 1:51 am

Tony,  
I have a question. I like your point about first order effects being limited
beyond 30 ppm of CO2. And that made me think of analogies/corollaries that may
explain that. I was thinking of a classic, glass greenhouse. If you build it
of 1/4″ thick glass, I suspect it would be just as warm as if you made it out
of 1″ thick glass (adjusting for insulation effects). Thus adding more glass,
just like adding more CO2, doesn't material impact warming due to the limit of
the absorption spectra being reached quickly. Any idea if my suggestion about
glass thickness in a greenhouse is accurate and provable with science? Thanks
for your insights.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

September 16, 2014 at 11:34 pm

CO2 behaves nothing like glass. It doesn't block convection

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/9d8e5744da87368c6b8c6cf6f6c8bfbb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Menicholas says:
        

May 3, 2015 at 8:28 am

This analogy may be more better:  
If you paint a window black, so that no light gets through, will putting
another coat of paint on it make the room darker?

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

May 3, 2015 at 4:06 pm

You are making the same mistake that the earliest investigators made – men
like John Tyndall in 1859. You can’t evaluate the effect of CO2 concentration
by just measuring or calculating the amount of radiation absorbed in a column
of the atmosphere.  
I suggest that you read the discussion of CO2 absorption at the American
Institute of Physics website.  
You can find this at: http://www.aip.org/history/climate/simple.htm#L_0146

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/eeb6841a0b9f1eac8ca456ec958eacc7?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) steve says:
        

December 11, 2015 at 6:36 pm

I have a property near sea level and have taken an interest in the subject of
rises over the past few years. The most puzzling question is why NASA chose to
use satellite measurement of a surface, which is changing constantly, and how
they can possibly be sure that the measurements relate to land levels or
average out. The physical tidal markers give a reliable measurement and now
apparently show little more than the slow rise, which has been going on for
centuries. The AIP article describes the heating of the oceans and attributes
the hiatus to this.There is little exchange to depth and these must be surface
measurements, yet the graph shows temperature calculations from cores at the
sea bed. Now, if the sea has risen in temperature, why has there been no sea
level rise through expansion. I believe tide markers and not satellites as
they can be related to land movements and must be reliable.

The article says of icecore measurements- CO2 and methane had gone up and down
ROUGHLY with the advance and retreat of ice. The graphs I saw from Greenland
showed a delay of about 800 years. Not exactly rough. Any comment?

Reply

        
                        * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

December 18, 2015 at 1:35 am

The AIP web site can probably help you.

        
                        * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/eeb6841a0b9f1eac8ca456ec958eacc7?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) steve says:
        

December 20, 2015 at 1:02 pm

I read the whole AIP article and side refs again Jerry. There were no answers
to my questions. The 800 year time lag I saw was from the Greenland ice core
paper- at least 4 years ago.

        
                        * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

December 20, 2015 at 11:30 pm

I can't say without seeing the data and accompanying documentation. Here is an
article about the Greenland ice core work by two experts on the subject. There
is no mention of an 800 year time lag.  
http://www.eos.ubc.ca/~mjelline/212_website/212_live/resources/Required-
Reading/Alley_Bender_1998.pdf  
I can't be certain without digging deeper, but the rise due to expansion
caused by heating of the water is probably very small (mm) compared to that
caused by melting of the polar ice sheets.

        
                  32. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f3c317b56e0d5a80564c161e767032d5?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Brad Anderson says:
        

September 17, 2014 at 4:29 pm

Hey Tony,

I am a broadcast meteorologist in Nebraska and I am a skeptic when it comes to
AGW. I have been reading your material and research for about a year now. You
are brilliant and pretty damn funny as well. Sometimes I get a little down
when I see the media spreading half truths, lies and gross exaggerations about
weather and climate. I am one who knows that weather extremes are not getting
worse nor are they increasing. So I get depressed when I hear things like the
drought in California is caused by humans even though there was a 200 year
drought during the middle ages. I occasionally have hope that reasonable
people will realize that this global warming thing is a joke. When people hear
that there has been no warming in 17 years, record sea ice in the Antarctica,
increasing sea ice at the North Pole and the many other failed predictions by
climate alarmists, I had hoped that people would realize that AGW is a crock.
But the alarmists were able to spin it and claim that global warming leads to
record cold and more sea ice. It is frustrating to continue to listen to the
lies in the media.

My question to you is, what will it take to convince people that these climate
alarmists are wrong, frauds and liars? What will the Earth's weather have to
do to stop the insane amount of money that goes into this political movement ?

Thanks,

Brad Anderson

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

September 17, 2014 at 4:34 pm

Brad,

I think that the only way things can change is when people understand that the
nonsense is hitting their wallet or their lifestyle, like in Australia. Most
people believe what their political leaders tell them, and Australia has
turned the corner. Hopefully the US will get there in a few years, but the
level of propaganda here is very high and will be difficult to turn until
people really understand the price they are paying.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f86446bc44cc437c6d6c2a385b319a66?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Kevin Casey says:
        

October 12, 2014 at 3:43 pm

Thanks for all you do, Tony! I found somewhere that the sky is not falling!
For me, the worst economic effect of this nonsense will be on the poor in
under-developed countries. They need cheap energy.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/289805bdcf30d112079fd1f49742438d?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) TimiBoy says:
        

December 4, 2014 at 3:15 am

Sadly I think Australia is not turning the corner at all. I think this will be
a one term Government, and we will, in another couple of years, be hell bent
on blowing what little resources we have left , following the Green Boondoggle
down the toilet.

Reply

        
                        * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/711c19a8b034718b127362a72ac631ef?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Murray says:
        

March 22, 2015 at 11:01 am

Sadly, I think you are correct. I am very worried what will happen if the
current government is replaced at the next election.

        
                  33. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4684524cce9b23385c5cffdfcd07e17c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Joe P. says:
        

September 23, 2014 at 12:05 am

Must read  
http://www.cnsnews.com/mrctv-blog/craig-bannister/rfk-jr-climate-skeptics-
should-be-hague-all-other-war-criminals

People's Climate Rally or People's Republic of Climate? Gov should imprison
those who deny the scam and sham science? More UN for crimes against humanity
by denial. ISIL tactics on unbelievers next?

Reply

        
                  34. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/ba164e677186901e99d9dd744abee930?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) The Gann Man says:
        

October 10, 2014 at 2:52 pm

FINALLY !!! Someone with common sense, who actually looks at the cold hard
facts, instead of just following all of the other mindless lemmings off the
cliff.  
Please keep up the good work, and never be afraid to speak the truth !

Reply

        
                  35. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/eb121c4d7c6f07530b4d731b9eb1781a?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Bryan says:
        

October 14, 2014 at 2:48 pm

Would love to see your thoughts on this:  
http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2014/10/14/oceans-
experiencing-largest-sea-rise-in-6000-years-study-says/  
thanks,  
bp

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

October 14, 2014 at 3:00 pm

From your link: "A new study, just published in PNAS, suggests that the ocean
has been surprisingly static since 4,000 B.C.. But that changed 150 years
ago."

And what happened 150 years ago? The end of the Little Ice Age. This is what
the Warmists have been doing since the beginning of this science scam: cherry
picking the starting point for their data. Of course the planet is warmer
since the last geologic cool era ended. And I am much hungrier now than when I
finished eating breakfast but I do not despair, because the cycle will repeat
when I eat lunch - please do not extrapolate a long term hunger trend based on
what's happened since breakfast.

Reply

        
                  36. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cf469d5b17b68c3c6c5a9fa73f0336f9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) KN says:
        

October 15, 2014 at 3:03 am

Hi, I am also for truth, unfortunately you have also  
TouchWiz Nature UX 2.0

mislead your readers by splitting hairs and genral omissions as much as those
you charge, who likewise push thier agenda.  
however truth is easier to determin by individuals willing to do the work.  
try this link for total hurricane counts, deaths, years, cost back to late
1800, compiled by data only.  
one thing is certain, frequency and duration of intensity has steadily
increased every decade, even the natural spikes of nina and nino ocean temp
currents every 7 to 9 years has become more intense.  
if you feel the need here to abolish the notion of human culpability, well…
what ever gets you through the nite, I guess. Denial is all the rage
regardless of religion, rank, politica or idiology.  
Yes the planet have changing weather patterns and climate spikes, most changed
due to large siesmic events changing particulates in upper atmosphere,
reflecting heat down wardsor upwards, radiation spikes from the sun, etc etc.
Unfortunately on a daily basis, our industrial and commercial synthetics
production and resulting polution globally has effectiviley mimiced many of
the resultant affects that contribute to climate change. Coupled with inherant
natural changes, effectively we have stoked the flames and significantly
contributed to climate change, ushering changes that likely would have taken
thousands of years to resolve naturally, to instead culminate in less than 1
century.  
Yes climate change is a natural occurance over a millenia. Yes, humans have
brought that change artificially over a single century of our highest
production towards… PROGRESS.  
Congratulations one and all.  
It doesnt matter what you or I say today. History tells all, even history made
a decade from now or even 3. None the less, you have put your points of view
here for the future generations to read and judge your intellect, sincerity,
denial and culpability from. The internet does thst well. Hopefully, you are
too old to recall your lack of urgency to address the climate issue and
instead deny it ever really was. Good luck to you all. Good luck to our future
children, may they forgive our ego and arrogance.  
http://www.wunderground.com/hurricane/hurrarchive.asp

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

October 18, 2014 at 4:15 pm

You say "one thing is certain" but based on the chart you link to, it's not
certain at all. There were two hurricanes in 2013 and we have to go all the
way back to 1982 to see another number that low. (And this year, by the way,
they were starting to wonder, until the last couple weeks, if we would even
have a hurricane in 2014.) Are you basing your conclusion on money damage and
people killed, because, if so, that would be a silly basis for saying storms
are increasing in intensity.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e5214a55f3f28d6f7dec5ebb2a3b6815?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Dr Steve says:
        

June 26, 2015 at 10:52 pm

This is a typical use of cherry picked data from an uninformed true believer.
I study disaster management and can definitively say the intensity you refer
to, at least with respect to deaths and costs, have no proven casual
relationship to global warming. Instead if you were to actually review the
literature has much more to do with population growth, land use, inflationary
effect on building costs, size of structures, and other variables that are in
no way related to climate change. Twit

Reply

        
                  37. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/42e2df51940f41dfab46c0e55d495f84?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) evangelist says:
        

October 16, 2014 at 8:41 am

good to see you found the pall mall gazette from the climate change back in
1871. i stumbled upon that one a while back, must be over a year. it's pretty
funny really, except that people believe this stuff i wonder, or they just
think they can pull the wool. climate change is surely tired and well
disestablished by now. quacks still out there trying to talk it up or presume
it's still a mandate to sabotage the economy. but it's old news where there
was not long ago the worst bushfires ever seen is now replaced with wind and
rain and even snow. but we're still told we' re heading for the hottest
southern hemisphere summer on record, despite the out of the ordinary cold
weather and rain and even snow.

my trick is to lampoon that article by telling people all about the climate
change and how i read it a great article, heard of the pall mall gazette. it
spells it out that man made climate change is a sure thing, and people start
to get all excited. until i tell them where i read it. like they haven't heard
of the pall mall gazette, what's that. it's the daily paper, back when climate
change was first discovered, sure as, scientific fact, in 1871. they shut up
then.

Reply

        
                  38. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/07e9e7eaf49974f0256c18a35016a2b1?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jeremyp99 says:
        

October 20, 2014 at 10:17 pm

Check this out…

http://vladtepesblog.com/2014/10/20/extraordinary-memri-clip-a-must-see-and-
must-spread/

Reply

        
                  39. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d7c28bb033f535ca48e4b76bd1c03319?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) snicker doodle says:
        

October 27, 2014 at 5:41 am

"Science works through research and debate – not censorship, propaganda,
faith, or intimidation"  
Exactly Steven! Let me add one more thing. Consensus is not science. Seems
pretty evident to me, but a lot of GW alarmists point to the "fact" that most
experts believe GW is man made (so it must be true!). At one time there was a
consensus that the world was flat, but we all know how that turned out. Glad I
came across your excellent website!

Reply

        
                  40. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/63fe610443529cd9bdf0e7cc788126e1?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) cbelkins says:
        

November 19, 2014 at 10:23 pm

Why "Steven Goddard" There is an old time weatherman in Cleveland by the name
Dick Goddard.  
I am new to the website. Interesting.

Reply

        
                  41. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1d6f804bc5df43b65d9bbf556d457989?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Morgan Wright says:
        

November 23, 2014 at 1:50 pm

These guys still have you listed as Steven Goddard.

http://www.desmogblog.com/global-warming-denier-database

What do I have to do to get on this prestigious list?

Reply

        
                  42. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/34b8556434919f34a70fbe0bc96fd1f3?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) john carroll says:
        

November 25, 2014 at 7:18 pm

I am a skeptic, I can't believe that man is intelligent enough to destroy the
planet, the planet will compensate and set us straight if necessary. Now I am
of the belief that if one has a hypothesis, then oe should have a evidence to
support said hypothesis in order to achieve a theory. Having said that, are
you aware of any lab experiment that shows what 120 PPM of CO2 does
temperatures? Did they do it and trash it because it doesn't prove the claim?
Just wondering, I'm fighting the good fight on message boards, and I stick to
my experiment as my proof there is no causation of CO2 to temperature or
climate.

Reply

        
                  43. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b2471a886cd7c9b439b5eb6d2c2d71a3?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Phil Geyer says:
        

December 3, 2014 at 7:56 am

It is easy to cherry pick individual data items and use them to prove your
point, while ignoring the larger picture created by all of the data points.
Discussing hurricanes that are category 3-5 when striking the US provides one
view. Examining the size of hurricanes or the amount of damage that they cause
would give a different picture. However, neither set of facts proves or
disproves global warming.

The 97% figure has little to do with American Meteorological Society members.
Th source of the 97% figure lies in Climate Scientists and years of published
research. Relatively few (about 15%) members of the AMS would say that their
area of expertise is climate. Among those members of the AMS who claim climate
as their area of expertise, 93% agree that humans have contributed
significantly to global warming over that last 150 years. (2012 survey)

Decades ago, tobacco companies insisted that smoking was not bad for us and
paraded experts to support their assertion. They succeeded in slowly down
legislation and preserving profits.

Now we have corporations who feel threatened by any effort to reduce global
warming. They are spending massive amounts of money and parading experts to
support their assertion. First it was “it isn't warming”. Then “it isn't human
caused”. Now - “it will hurt the economy”. They are succeeding in slowing down
legislation and preserving profits.

I am concerned about the world that my grandchildren will raise their children
in. I have looked at a lot of data and scientific articles. I am not a climate
scientist. However, God gave me a reasonably good mind and as I examine all of
this information, I conclude that the overwhelming consensus is real.

It isn't going to be easy to address, but the more we try to hide from it, the
larger the problem will become. I hope that much of the solution comes from
U.S. inventiveness, research and technology. Such development would help, not
hurt, our industry and our economy.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

December 5, 2014 at 8:15 pm

Your claim about the 97% consensus is so hilarious, so thoroughly debunked
long since, that I almost spit coffee on my keyboard when I saw someone still
trying to sell that snake oil. Most people know where that number came from,
but for those who don't I detailed its history back in February:
http://www.jpattitude.com/140222.php.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1c85e536fcdd29244c6639cbe4380409?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) mike says:
        

May 15, 2015 at 10:27 pm

You're a moderate and rational human being who is concerned for future
generations. I suspect you will become depressed by the weirdness of the
responses and posts on here from folks who seem to be on another planet. Don't
waste too much energy on it.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

May 17, 2015 at 11:03 pm

Mike's right, Phil. You're wasting your time. This is a forum for wingnuts.

Reply

        
                        * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e5214a55f3f28d6f7dec5ebb2a3b6815?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Dr Steve says:
        

June 26, 2015 at 11:01 pm

right so rather than debate on the merits of the pts and evidence presented
you use the typical liberal tactic of ad hominem attacks This only proves that
not only has the left become the haven for wing-nut behavior and thought they
employ fascist tactics to shout down dissenters of their myopic worldview.

        
                  44. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d5fc0e6b4a3905bae2b1d94a1f9a98a4?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Malcolm Roberts says:
        

December 4, 2014 at 3:17 am

Well said, Tony

Fine content and clear writing easy and enjoyable to read.

Malcolm Roberts

Reply

        
                  45. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f908f017f5d882cb44f1f3e184317936?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Teppo says:
        

December 10, 2014 at 7:33 pm

Hi Tony,

Just wanted to send you link to pretty nice doctoral thesis about UHI in
Finland. Well, might be that  
we have it different here: https://www.doria.fi/handle/10024/101035

Reply

        
                  46. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/17c45b62426860340cb51722a4c489c0?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) tomwys1 says:
        

December 13, 2014 at 2:33 pm

Keep it up, Tony! You're on the side of the Angels!  
Never give in, Never give up!!!

Reply

        
                  47. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/425c0ac88ce3516e7ff203bc52ffa7ac?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) katesisco says:
        

December 17, 2014 at 6:47 pm

I believe this debate will be a moot issue after the Paris accords next year
where the climate credits will be available in Africa.  
As previously, aid money went to develop mines and the associated water power,
this round of funding will wear a new face. Aid money to Africa has been
indited as an enabler of the massacres of population in Rwanda and Burundi.
These 'climate dollars' will be designated to be allotted to development of
solar/wind farms contracted to US/Euro developers, specifically to power
associated factories/firms located next to them.  
The remaining flat lands and water resources will be redirected to these
national conglomerate efforts. The populations of the areas, noted in Tracey
Kidders new book as 'having been described as 'thickly populated' in 1910,'
will have no place in the new order. Traditional cow herders and farmers will
be restricted and displaced in their homeland.  
Please see WIKI Botswana where the US has located its base of the Africa Corps
and the large amount of money that is tied to " restricting-read banning--
cattle from the 'fragile' and 'dessicated' land that is the populations only
source of income.

Reply

        
                  48. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d5237c448caab90f94d3fc5944e1b00a?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Larry Fields says:
        

December 22, 2014 at 8:14 pm

Hi Steven,  
I like the approaches you've taken in your blog.

First, there's nothing like archived newspaper articles to document
inconvenient episodes of mindless climate alarmism from the past, which
Warmies are desperately trying to put behind them.

Second, one graph is worth a thousand words. This allows you to keep your
articles short and to the point.

Although WUWT is an excellent blog, many of their articles are far too long
for my ADDish brain to handle. Yes, WUWT has graphs. But they also have
thousands of words to go along with those graphs.

There's another reason why you'll always be Steven to me. Having to keep track
of both an Anthony AND a Tony would be a little confusing for me.

Reply

        
                  49. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/ba164e677186901e99d9dd744abee930?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Russ says:
        

December 29, 2014 at 3:14 pm

That is the response we should expect from a typical Kool Aid drinking, big
government, 'do whatever they tell us to do', liberal, who only gets his news
from MSNBC and NPR.  
When all else fails, and the facts are not on your side, resort to hysterics
and name calling.

Reply

        
                  50. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b2471a886cd7c9b439b5eb6d2c2d71a3?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) P Geyer says:
        

December 30, 2014 at 9:43 pm

Hmm, Russ, I believe that was hysterics and name calling. Should I therefore
assume that the facts are not on your side? 🙂

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/ba164e677186901e99d9dd744abee930?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Russ says:
        

January 4, 2015 at 2:23 am

Perhaps a bit of hyperbole…….you got me there ! But no hysterics, to be
certain.  
Also, when I said 'name calling', I was referring to descriptors of a more
derogatory and defamatory nature (personal insults and the like).  
Point well taken though P Geyer,………perhaps I should have just said 'When all
else fails…….etc, etc' and let it go at that ! : )

Reply

        
                  51. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4944d5ea0f1f6ddbb2975ba9a610c1dc?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) fritz chess says:
        

January 2, 2015 at 8:57 pm

I asked this question last week and never got an answer, how do you
knuckleheads explain all the melting glaciers around the world? I've watched
them melting down with my own eyes.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

January 2, 2015 at 9:06 pm

![](https://pbs.twimg.com/media/B6X18H7IUAAAnLc.png)

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://i0.wp.com/graph.facebook.com/v2.2/1297651868/picture?q=type%3Dlarge%26_md5%3D9d98a086a6c41521fd0036e332107980&resize=40%2C40) Brian Driscoll says:
        

July 28, 2015 at 3:56 pm

Glaciers have been melting since the end of the Little Ice Age in the early
1800s. Visitors to the Canadian Rockies in the 1920s remarked on how much
glacier recession had occurred since photos of the glaciers were first taken
about two decades earlier. This, of course, was well before the massive
increase in carbon output that has taken place since the mid-20th century and
continuing today. In fact, glacier recession in the Canadian Rockies has not
accelerated over the past century, despite massive increase in carbon output.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

January 3, 2015 at 3:05 pm

Some glaciers are melting, some are growing. Stop watching the ones that are
melting and maybe you will feel reassured.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f87b84b0523f62883aa8b57485a8b3dd?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) 56warcry says:
        

April 11, 2016 at 3:28 pm

Wow, your eyeballs must be on fire. Spring turns to summer, summer to fall,
fall to winter.  
Guess that's a new phenomenon as well!

Reply

        
                  52. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/ba164e677186901e99d9dd744abee930?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Russ says:
        

January 3, 2015 at 12:28 am

How do you explain that Ice Ages (and glaciers) have come and gone, many times
before, many thousands of years ago ?

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/8897852b5e37368d28464a22186a7b2d?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Johnny Enlish says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 5:54 am

Cro Magnon Man was a serious V8 enthusiast. The last Ice Age, blame Cro Magnon
and his 8 mi/gal. gas-guzzling hemi muscle cars.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/eec95929d821e83133423a74b756484d?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) EmmyP says:
        

September 18, 2015 at 5:39 pm

^^^ I love this guy

Reply

        
                  53. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b865079be33539331809a55acb3453ff?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Edmonton Al says:
        

January 7, 2015 at 1:12 pm

Sorry ………….Tony my apologies.

Reply

        
                  54. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/48c6d6ac6e65493f3fc41e211efdc9d9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Thom says:
        

January 24, 2015 at 1:10 am

Steve/Tony, I appreciate the “debate” here. Here and similar places including
some sharp folks up in Canada are about the only place where you can see both
sides of the issues. Even critics add value now and then by being proven
wrong. It has always been my understanding that a real scientist has to be a
skeptic if he is to do honor to the scientific method. I see little of that on
the religious cult side of AGW. While egos, invested interests, careers,
reputations are not unique to what passes for the scientific community today
it does seem to be the main driver of Global Warming/Climate Change energy
today. The science, not so much.

I was introduced in my profession long ago to the phrase, “if you can’t baffle
them with BS, Dazzle them with Brilliance” followed later in life by a shorten
version of the same thing, “complexity worship”. I’ve noted all too often that
when the AGW crowd are confronted with the obvious failures of their theory to
hold “heat” literally they resort to some rendition of “weight of paper” chest
beating or a version of above to avoid stating the obvious which as I
understand it the Founder of the Global Warming Theory admitted before he died
that if observed results don’t match the theory than the theory is wrong. The
more complexity worship cranked into the debate the more difficult it is for
those who don’t swim in this day and night to make informed decisions and
ultimately that is where the debate must be won.

Thanks again for all that you have contributed to both sides of the debate.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/878a184a04aa895bab55664968579288?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) D. Scofflaw says:
        

December 25, 2015 at 2:24 pm

Interesting. What I heard was just the opposite: If you can’t dazzle them with
brilliance, baffle them with bullshirts.

Climate science? Calling something science does not make it science.

Reply

        
                  55. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fe611b73c3be9c01c1b837c77c776afb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) istasz says:
        

February 3, 2015 at 11:05 pm

"I have degrees in Geology and Electrical Engineering, and worked on the
design team of many of the world’s most complex designs, including some which
likely power your PC or Mac. I have worked as a contract software developer on
climate and weather models for the US government."

Not one word of this convinces me that you have any particular insight into
climate science. A publication or two in the field would. However, climate
deniers seem also seem to be in denial that the universal currency for
credibility in any scientific field is just that - a peer reviewed
publication. Barrring that, any scientific statement you make is pure
conjecture, and likely motivated by one or another deep-rooted psychological
factors (did you get turned down to grad school).

That "Only 52% of American Meteorological Society members believe that man is
the primary contributor to global warming" is a brutal testimony to their
collective conservatism and ignorance. No respected climatologist would give a
rat's as* about the unlearned opinion of a meteorlogist. They mainly read the
NOAO feeds, which most anyone can do, even this nuclear physicist. Note that
my training does not give me the hubris to disqualify the coherent, conclusive
findings of 1000's of PhD climatologists, but it does at least make me
qualified to comment on those, like you, who are unqualified to earn any other
title other than "climate denier".

How unoriginal. Too bad you can't redirect your energy into solving problems,
rather than creating or obfuscating them.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

February 5, 2015 at 12:49 am

I can't fix stupid

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fe611b73c3be9c01c1b837c77c776afb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) istasz says:
        

February 5, 2015 at 4:49 am

Is that a self referential statement or a non-sequiter? In either case, a
complete deflection of the unassailable fact that you have no particular
insight, skills or knowledge about climate science. Instead you vent your
frustration of same in some impotent nut wing blog full of conspiracy nonsense
that would make my five year old laugh out loud

Reply

        
                        * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

February 5, 2015 at 4:57 am

I really meant it. I can't fix your stupid.

        
                        * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a9fe255486d67576db8f2e2eab489282?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Tom says:
        

July 28, 2015 at 5:35 pm

Istasz, don't try to use logic with Steven. He is not aware when he makes
sense and when he does not.

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/51f76e62bf9386651e1d904f60f4ffd9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) bongstar420 says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 8:50 pm

Yes you can…erhem….we

Retroviral thearapy with the right genes in the right places followed by a
proper education= fixed

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/56b9b7ffdb46a8179708d6c91871037c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Ron Lewis says:
        

April 8, 2016 at 6:19 pm

So true. The logic of academic circle-jerkers: "They can't be credible because
we say they aren't, and we're the ones with the pieces of paper signed by our
friends so you have to believe us. So there."

As if anyone willing to borrow $100,000 can't buy a PhD from Podunk Community
College and call themselves a climate scientist. SMH

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/8897852b5e37368d28464a22186a7b2d?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Johnny Enlish says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 5:55 am

Maybe you should plant some trees and quit yapping…….

Trees are people too, bro.

Reply

        
                  56. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fe611b73c3be9c01c1b837c77c776afb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) istasz says:
        

February 5, 2015 at 5:21 am

I can't fix the fact that you can't get your rants into a respectable
publication. Not clever enough - afraid you would be ridiculed by folks who
really understand science? Not charlatans, mind you.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

February 5, 2015 at 5:25 am

Instead of you mindless ad homs, why don't you criticize something specific
that I have written? ROFL

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/51f76e62bf9386651e1d904f60f4ffd9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) bongstar420 says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 8:51 pm

Its easy to define yourself as correct in light of extreme complexity
surrounded by feeble minds.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/878a184a04aa895bab55664968579288?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) D. Scofflaw says:
        

December 25, 2015 at 2:32 pm

Implying that you're a nuclear physicist does not make you one. Calling
something a science doesn't make it a science.

Me? Majored in mathematics (54 semester credit hours) and minored in physics
(18 credit hours). In my case, my claim is true.

Reply

        
                  57. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fe611b73c3be9c01c1b837c77c776afb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) istasz says:
        

February 5, 2015 at 6:24 am

But you haven't written anything original, just debunked others. It's actually
impossible for me to discover anything new or original in the semi-rants that
litter this blog. Time to step up and hit with the big boys. Why don't you
write up your "findings" in a format that is coherent and logical, as if you
were going to submit it to a journal, and then share it with your audience.

How bout this? Pick any one of your pet topics, e.g., use the scientific
method (see Bacon) to undercut the flawed methodology used by the authors,
counter it with some original research of your own (the hard part), back it up
with a dozen or so published references (not blog entries) and post it to this
site (unless you feel inspired to reach higher). As they teach them in
elementary school nowadays, take care to build a logical argument, buttress it
with facts, make it well researched and break new ground.

Then I will criticize it.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/dd20cc8a8d3ddead7717e7cfd1be1db2?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) spren says:
        

March 20, 2015 at 4:21 am

What a sanctimonious twit you are. Why do you progs always sound exactly
alike. So convinced of your moral and intellectual superiority without any
evidence, just like your so-called science. Do you even know what peer review
is in this field called climate science? You do know they are little more than
literature reviews that the TEAM decides is plausible enough to be published
in a journal. They are not attempts to either replicate or validate what has
been written. Why should the author of this blog have to earn your right to
criticize him? Why don't you start your own blog and see how many people find
it useful enough to visit? All you offered were personal attacks and grade-
school level haughtiness.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fe611b73c3be9c01c1b837c77c776afb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) istasz says:
        

March 20, 2015 at 7:34 am

That's the problem with reactionaries - they simply hate (don't understand)
the scientific process and so mistake it as haughtiness.

Reply

        
                        * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cbf6d94eaa4a3569cd5c2c975d667832?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Bunk X says:
        

March 26, 2015 at 2:29 am

I understand snide condescension.

        
                        * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/9d8e5744da87368c6b8c6cf6f6c8bfbb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Menicholas says:
        

May 3, 2015 at 2:09 pm

I understand the scientific method.  
Find one definition of the scientific method, or "process" as you call it,
that mentions pal review.  
Or even publishing. Publishing is an academic goal, not a scientific one.  
Anything that is not falsifiable is not scientific.  
BTW, "Thousands of PhD's in climatology?"  
I doubt you can find half of one thousand with a PhD in climatology.  
Until recently, it was not even a natural science degree, it was a social
science, Humanities department, Liberal Arts degree.  
And the general distribution requirements reflected that.  
There are people working in the climate establishment who have PhD's after
their name, but their field of study was something unrelated to climate of
even science. And yet they are called climatologist. (Gavin Schmidt comes to
mind.)  
How does that work?  
Since when is creating a computer model counted as real research?  
Since when is an hypothesis which has failed to make an accurate prediction
for going on at least twenty years not discarded, but instead said to be
settled?

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/51f76e62bf9386651e1d904f60f4ffd9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) bongstar420 says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 8:53 pm

We don't..some of us are more qualified as geniuses than others.

Reply

        
                  58. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/84b07b940f4411e87c41eb524d1e859e?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Gustav says:
        

February 10, 2015 at 8:26 pm

You might be interested in the chart at the link below. It is a comparison of
two snapshots of the GISS GLB.Ts file, one from January 26, 2001 (red) and the
other from February 9, 2015 (green). The two lines represent the annual
temperature anomaly (January-December) from 1880 to 2000. In both cases these
are the results that GISS announces to the world after adjusting the raw data.
Given that the raw data has not changed and presumably the adjustment
algorithms have not changed, it is interesting that over 14 years the "final"
published GISS results have changed.

![](https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/39580638/GLB.TS_compare_.png)

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/9d8e5744da87368c6b8c6cf6f6c8bfbb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Menicholas says:
        

May 3, 2015 at 2:11 pm

If someone was massaging you for all that time, you might look different, too.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/51f76e62bf9386651e1d904f60f4ffd9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) bongstar420 says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 8:54 pm

Lets see charts that span actual climate time frames and include the margin
errors in the estimates.

Reply

        
                  59. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a1d62a44ffd9f06f0535e4d2ef87a817?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Gareth Morgan says:
        

February 12, 2015 at 7:30 pm

Hi Tony. Love your work. I've been looking into the actual mechanisms of
global cooling. Re-radiation is obviously not a significant contributor, so
the atmospheric gas mix is irrelevant, as you've sensibly concluded. Can I
send you a copy of my book, "The Art of Science"? (I was going to call it Real
Science but hey…) More good stuff in there for your blog and lots of other
examples of bad science that "everybody knows". Email me if you're interested.  
Peace.  
Gareth

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

February 14, 2015 at 2:47 pm

Gareth, I have a particular interest in bad science so I'm interested in your
book, but when I looked for it with my Kindle I couldn't find it. Is there a
digital version?

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a1d62a44ffd9f06f0535e4d2ef87a817?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Gareth Morgan says:
        

March 4, 2015 at 3:51 pm

Sorry, didn't see your reply.. Email me ( garethmorgan@live.com ) and I'll
send you a pdf if that's ok. Hope you enjoy it.

Reply

        
                  60. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

February 14, 2015 at 10:48 pm

You say above that, "Adding more CO2 has minimal effect, because there is not
much radiation left to be absorbed." You are making the same mistake that the
earliest investigators made - men like John Tyndall in 1859. You can't
evaluate the effect of CO2 concentration by just measuring or calculating the
amount of radiation absorbed in a column of the atmosphere. Heating at each
level of elevation affects the temperature of the air below. I recommend that
you read the discussion of CO2 absorption at the American Institute of Physics
website at:  
http://www.aip.org/history/climate/simple.htm#L_0146

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/51f76e62bf9386651e1d904f60f4ffd9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) bongstar420 says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 8:55 pm

Is there an experiment which shows CO2 thermal qualities in volumes on the
order of cubic miles with boiling rock below and frozen vacuum above?

Reply

        
                  61. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

February 19, 2015 at 6:49 pm

You say above that, “Adding more CO2 has minimal effect, because there is not
much radiation left to be absorbed.” You are making the same mistake that the
earliest investigators made – men like John Tyndall in 1859. You can’t
evaluate the effect of CO2 concentration by just measuring or calculating the
amount of radiation absorbed in a column of the atmosphere.  
I suggest that you read the discussion of CO2 absorption at the American
Institute of Physics website where they explain that:  
"The greenhouse process works regardless of whether the passage of radiation
is saturated in lower layers. As explained above, the energy received at the
Earth’s surface must eventually work its way back up to the higher layers
where radiation does slip out easily. Adding some greenhouse gas to those
high, thin layers must warm the planet no matter what happens lower down."  
You can find this at: http://www.aip.org/history/climate/simple.htm#L_0146

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

February 22, 2015 at 3:29 pm

Satellites show no warming for 18 years

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

February 22, 2015 at 8:48 pm

Several points about satellite data:  
a) This is not the only source of data on temperature change.  
b) It is the most problematic measurement because it must be derived from
microwave radiance.  
c) There is one study of satellite data from the University of Alabama in
Huntsville that climate change skeptics like to cite. It didn't show an
absence of warming. It showed 0.13 F warming per decade, which isn't
consistent with other measurements of 0.21 F. In 2012 researchers at the
University of Washington found a problem in the UAH analysis which, when
corrected, brought it inline with the o.21 F value. Here is an article on it.  
http://www.washington.edu/news/2012/05/07/new-research-brings-satellite-
measurements-and-global-climate-models-closer/

Reply

        
                        * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/9d8e5744da87368c6b8c6cf6f6c8bfbb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Menicholas says:
        

May 3, 2015 at 2:17 pm

"Several points about satellite data:"

Are you a song and dance man, by any chance?

Got anything new to sell?

        
                      * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1c85e536fcdd29244c6639cbe4380409?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) mike hamblett says:
        

July 28, 2015 at 4:06 pm

What's your opinion of the great mass of terrestrial and oceanic measurement
of temperature showing unprecedented rise during last 18years.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/51f76e62bf9386651e1d904f60f4ffd9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) bongstar420 says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 8:56 pm

Our satellites are the products of Operation Paperclip…erhem. I mean NASA

Reply

        
                  62. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/36bfa49032aab0c2c879f49626272cc1?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) D R Lunsford says:
        

February 19, 2015 at 6:51 pm

You are not a meteorologist, yet you feel free to speak for them. That is just
amazing. Everyone's an expert. (PS, my background is also in science, and
there isn't the slightest doubt in my mind that man-made warming is real. It's
literally impossible for it not to be real.)

-drl

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

February 22, 2015 at 3:28 pm

ZZZZZZZZZZZZZzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

February 22, 2015 at 5:21 pm

Not just impossible but "literally" impossible? Well, now, that's different. I
must reconsider my position. I take back all the bad stuff I've said about
Global Warmists over the years. Nobody with your level of solid credentials
("background" in science -- whoa) ever told me it was "literally impossible
for it not to be real." I surrender.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/eec95929d821e83133423a74b756484d?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) EmmyP says:
        

September 18, 2015 at 5:44 pm

lol

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/9d8e5744da87368c6b8c6cf6f6c8bfbb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Menicholas says:
        

January 10, 2016 at 12:28 am

Tee hee.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/51f76e62bf9386651e1d904f60f4ffd9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) bongstar420 says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 8:58 pm

You disqualify your own opinion

Reply

        
                  63. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/07e9e7eaf49974f0256c18a35016a2b1?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jeremyp99 says:
        

February 23, 2015 at 1:32 pm

One more for the tampering book…

https://notalotofpeopleknowthat.wordpress.com/2015/02/22/noaa-caught-cooling-
the-past/

Reply

        
                  64. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/b2471a886cd7c9b439b5eb6d2c2d71a3?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) P Geyer says:
        

February 26, 2015 at 4:13 pm

Interesting article on an eleven year scientific study of the effect of the
increasing level of CO2 in the atmosphere.
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2015/02/150225132103.htm

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

February 26, 2015 at 4:17 pm

Utter nonsense  
https://stevengoddard.wordpress.com/2015/02/26/junk-science-award-for-the-
evening/

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/51f76e62bf9386651e1d904f60f4ffd9?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) bongstar420 says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 8:59 pm

What time scale is climate defined at?

…and how long could we call our "measurements" "accurate?"

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/97b925b42b13876e49ac0f3276417957?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Philip Bruce Heywood says:
        

March 25, 2015 at 6:26 am

I am new here and am yet to be certain whether Mr Goddard is the dog or the
girl in the top collage. I suspect our Provider could indeed be a he and his
name could be Tony, although I have been incorrect on gender before today.
P.G., you raise a point which Mr Goddard summarily dismisses. His reasons
presumably are published elsewhere. If I might insert a note re. SCIENCEDAILY.
This publication attempts to report on what a cross section of scientists are
doing. The reports tend to be accurate but the source material often has to be
corrected and in rare instances is so erroneous and even anti-humanity, it
gets corrected or removed.

Here is a direct extract from the report to which you link: "The results agree
with theoretical predictions of the greenhouse effect due to human activity."

Think about that. Firstly, why do they insert these words : "….the greenhouse
effect due to human activity"? If a volcano or a comet or a herd of extinct
dinosaurs inserted the greenhouse gas, the effect of the gas would be exactly
the same as if a motor car inserted it? True? How could the effect of the gas
be any different, if the gas is exactly of the same composition regardless of
origin? So here we encounter a default in logic. Assume I breed horses. Horses
emit a surprisingly large quantity of methane. Because I breed horses and ride
horses to work, am I therefore an enemy of the planet? Who is to blame, here?
Myself, the horses, my employer who requires I travel to work?

Let me point out the obvious. If the Creator allowed a situation such as this
to develop -- environmentally criminal horses, environmentally destructive
humans, suffocation, broiling, drowning and ruin the result of bad creative
planning -- the Creator is at fault. If however the Creator states or implies
in writing and via logic that we need not be distressed -- he has it in hand
and always has had it in hand -- then the fault lies …..?  
The fault lies with who? The fault lies with nervous nellies, playing into the
hands of vexatious taxation, totalitarianism and knee-jerk absurdity.

And the SCIENCEDAILY report, when examined, contains zero useful science
information. The old 19th Century black body heat transfer/retention methods
are assumed to be in force and, lo and behold, when you get a 'test tube' and
do the measurements, the black body heat transfer/retention with the
greenhouse effect, works!

Do they expect a cheer? The centuries old methods are like attempting the
northwest passage in a row boat. Outdated, inadequate. Not one of those 'test
tube' predictions can be shown to be reliable in terms of the big picture --
the planet. The reasons for the inadequacy are obvious to anyone with the
slightest understanding of -- guess what? Climate physics on the planetary
scale, and the history of the planet itself -- geology.

Reply

        
                  65. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

February 26, 2015 at 7:13 pm

I don't think you can brush these measurements off as utter nonsense. They
wouldn't have been affected by things such as La Nina and El Nino. As the
article says,

"These instruments, located at ARM research sites in Oklahoma and Alaska,
measure thermal infrared energy that travels down through the atmosphere to
the surface. They can detect the unique spectral signature of infrared energy
from CO2.  
Other instruments at the two locations detect the unique signatures of
phenomena that can also emit infrared energy, such as clouds and water vapor.
The combination of these measurements enabled the scientists to isolate the
signals attributed solely to CO2."

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d36b3bcefb4436729aa142e4aa250c27?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) stevengoddard says:
        

February 26, 2015 at 7:23 pm

El Nino warms the troposphere, so more LW is emitted. The increase in CO2
wavelengths is due to the fact that there are more emitters as CO2
concentration increases.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

February 26, 2015 at 9:34 pm

I don't think you understand. El Nino. El Nino and La Nina have nothing to do
with it. They compared the radiation in the CO2 absorption bands to other
wavelengths so they could eliminate effects of things like that.

Reply

        
                        * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f6183e8441f9bca915cd7eeb1fe75f72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Neptune says:
        

July 29, 2015 at 5:49 am

Jerry, you missed the point. The more CO2 the more CO2-emitted radiation you
will see - even if it's cooling! It only proves that there is more CO2. The
fact that you would reach other conclusions tells us that you do not have a
scientific mind.

By the way, the atmosphere is a three phase system. The climate fraudsters
haven't even begun to wrap their minds around the physics at work here. I'm
sure you don't even know what I'm talking about so stop flapping your cheeks
about "science." The science hasn't even begun.

        
                        * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

July 30, 2015 at 3:40 am

To Neptune: Read the articles below. If you can understand them and are
capable of discussing them intelligently, get back to me.  
https://www.aip.org/history/climate/index.htm  
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2015/02/150225132103.htm

        
                  66. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f3c317b56e0d5a80564c161e767032d5?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Climate Is Cyclical says:
        

March 17, 2015 at 12:55 pm

Hey Tony,

I don't know how to contact you so I am asking my question here, hope you get
it.

Have you ever wrote a book? Do you plan on writing a book? With all of the
research you have done over the years, I think you have the material for an
informative story. You could include all of the past "climate scares",
disasters of the past, politics behind Mann-made climate change, etc…. I am
not a publisher, just a meteorologist who thinks you could write a book with a
lot of good information.

Take care,

Brad Anderson  
brad.anderson@1011now.com

Reply

        
                  67. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/96d72f479802e434ee27ef774e20b4e0?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Ron Clutz says:
        

March 21, 2015 at 2:36 pm

Help. I am stuck in moderation.

Reply

        
                  68. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/34d62f5b35e1240150a6081deb218862?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Lee says:
        

March 23, 2015 at 5:18 am

I am loving your site. Thank you so much for sharing your thinking, research
and expertise - it all makes a lot of sense to me. I am curious about your
take on the current drought in California? As a Californian, it is of
particular interest (and at times worry) to me. Thanks, Lee

Reply

        
                  69. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/97b925b42b13876e49ac0f3276417957?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Philip Bruce Heywood says:
        

March 24, 2015 at 10:02 am

"My name is Tony Heller. I am a whistle blower. I am an independent thinker
who is considered a heretic by the orthodoxy on both sides of the climate
debate." End quote from the head piece.

a). I would be in your debt if you would fill out a little on the thoughts
raised by the heading extract. Don't ignore 'both sides' as one of the sources
of query to the casual passerby. (I must confess to being less than a full-on
student of climate blogs. Don't consult them much -- for the obvious reason
that there is no such thing as climate science -- unless you are either God,
or actually seriously understand quantum physics plus the physics of turbulent
flow plus all aspects of heat transfer by all natural methods plus stellar
nuclear fusion their interactions and effects upon each other etc. etc. blah
blah -- which makes you God anyway -- which is precisely what dictators on a
self-created divine mission are always playing at. Climate science the divine
right of drips on a rainy day.)

b). I would also be in your debt, should you, or anyone else, care to do an
evaluation of my climate moderation paper, readily found (at least, it was
readily found a month ago when I looked, under "Climate Moderation Magnetic
Interaction Sun - Earth", on GOOGLE, etc. Climate/weather is way beyond human
technology but the geologic record is testimony to a thermostat built into the
system. The mechanism of the thermostat is coming into distant focus? Ta. If
it's any consolation, I have been banned and barred regularly in various
places.

Reply

        
                  70. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/32557042d41bda7b476855af2d44aa0b?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Dave B says:
        

April 4, 2015 at 12:15 am

Hi Steve,  
I have had this itch for almost 20 years.

8/22/81 Hansen study NYT Saturday 5am Brooklyn, NY  
6am Saturday morning: A collage student working night shift over the summer. I
get home and relax, sipping a beer on the stoop of a Brooklyn brown stone,
reading the Saturday NYT Science Section. I thought; "AGW, this seems
plausible, based on first principles and better than the alternative of an ice
age.."

1997 Al Gore “debate is over”;  
I got the itch, nothing is this simple.

2006 Al Gore “inconvenient Truth”;  
I got angry at the naivety, the lack of prospective and  
the ignorance of how really complicated the world is.

2007 “the science is settled”  
I realized this isn't science, it is about righteousness and political power.

After 30 year working scientific research and engineering, one thing I have
learned, is that the world is much more complicated than it first appears in a
first principle.

2011 Get the pop corn out!  
Every night I watch the clams spinning out into the absurd.  
The liberal politicians spin their "science religion" based on shaky data and
models. (Like these folks have ever tried to model anything).

2014 I found your website.  
I'm done with being polite and reasoned (starting out AGW conversations w/
acknowledging some evidence of warm and taking things in context). That is why
I appreciate your in their face approach.  
You are breath of fresh air to me.

Thank you  
I'm happy to contribute to your hard work, keep it up!  
Dave B

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1c85e536fcdd29244c6639cbe4380409?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) mike hamblett says:
        

July 28, 2015 at 4:12 pm

Maybe you're just gettin old and reactionary

Reply

        
                  71. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/c7c25d0df48545162a14ea6e8c815320?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) moreCarbonOK[&theWeatherisalwaysGood]HenryP says:
        

July 11, 2015 at 5:21 pm

I am still waiting for you to approve my comments on this website?

Reply

        
                  72. ![](https://i0.wp.com/lh3.googleusercontent.com/-K9hc45GgAHw/AAAAAAAAAAI/AAAAAAAAACA/n_hzyxHNk80/photo.jpg?resize=40%2C40&ssl=1) Eddie George says:
        

July 21, 2015 at 11:56 pm

Tony,

I am curious about the usage of glacial ice core sample data and its
application to this study. I am seeing the samples being used to show that
"recent trends are unprecedented" over thousands of years. I am looking to
understand more than refute.

Thank you

Reply

        
                  73. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4300a01e91e49f302850b35de0904b69?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Daniel Sanchez says:
        

July 28, 2015 at 2:30 pm

I find this web site very interesting. I also like how several people on this
web site believe only individuals with degrees are capable of intelligent,
coherent thought. I also enjoy their arguments that science is based on the
opinions of others. Since when was fact based on how many agreed on it being
fact?

With that off my chest, I would like to point out a very simple matter that
would help clear up a lot of confusion. The world does not have a global
temperature. The world is not a person whom you can stick a thermometer into
its mouth and get a temperature. We have devices throughout the world that
take various temperatures and then average them. We have already started with
the false premise that a global temperature exists. It is an average of all
temperatures. I could easily manipulate the data by averaging in more of the
hotter temperatures than the cooler temperatures, or vice versa.

Second, have we even been measuring the data long enough to establish if this
is a pattern or a deviation from the pattern? Why do we continually bring
everything down to the human lifespan level? Patterns could take 100s or
1,000s of years to show but we just assume it has to be shorter.

Thirdly, people are dishonest. I don't doubt the machines and equipment for
the most part, but does anyone believe that someone who has dedicated their
life to something would willingly come out and say I was wrong, I lied and I
will return all the awards and money I received for my work? Very few people
will tell on themselves. Instead, to avoid embarrassment and punishment, they
will lie their faces off.

D.Sanchez

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f43bc4fdd635c16848f31232795d6548?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) jpattitude says:
        

August 3, 2015 at 2:36 am

"The world does not have a global temperature."

I can't believe you said that. More than five years ago I had fun making the
same point: http://www.jpattitude.com/100222.php. Temperature of the planet?
Measured with thermometers? It's beyond absurd.

Reply

        
                  74. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1c85e536fcdd29244c6639cbe4380409?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) mike hamblett says:
        

July 28, 2015 at 4:14 pm

Are we responding here to Stephen Goddard or Tony Heller, and are either of
you any saner than Anthony Watts?

Reply

        
                  75. ![](https://i0.wp.com/graph.facebook.com/v2.2/867799836644531/picture?q=type%3Dlarge&resize=40%2C40) Lisa Grimaldi says:
        

August 1, 2015 at 4:31 am

http://climatecrocks.com/tag/steven-goddard/

Reply

        
                  76. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/94c77fa52668fdb3072355d91c13b01f?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Michael J. Satterfield says:
        

August 1, 2015 at 9:35 pm

I am a physicist and electrical engineer. I made A's in the stuff too. I don't
believe the data the government spouts. You can bet if Al Gore and Obama
believe in this, then it is a hoax and all I say is follow the $$$$$….as in
carbon credits. Carbon credits my ass.

What I think is going to surprise the hell out of a lot of people is how cold
it is going to get in the future! If the current sunspot trend continues, and
we slip into another Maunder Minimum, it is going to get, to quote my dearly
departed Mama, "Colder than a well diggers ass in the Yukon!"

Lower sunspot activity correlates with lower magnetic field activity from the
sun. This causes more cosmic "rays" in the form of high velocity charged
particles (protons) to bombard the upper atmosphere. What does this do? It
creates clouds. More clouds cool the planet. They've proved it at the CERN
super collider! When a simulated upper atmosphere was bombarded with high
energy protons it created cloud nuclei!

For those who don't believe it, magnetic fields will deflect particles; it is
called the Lorentz force and is shown mathematically by this equation:

F = qE + q(V X B) where q = charge; E = electric field vector; V = velocity
vector, and B = magnetic field vector.

Need further proof, in 1976-77 at age 15, I witnessed one of the most harshest
winters I will never forget. In North Georgia where I lived, the ground froze
18″ deep. We had below zero temperatures many times that year. What was the
deal? The solar sunspot cycle was at a minima.

More proof, in 1985, on Jan 21, when they inaugurated Reagan for his 2nd term,
it was -4°F in DC-they had to do it indoors for the first time EVER. BTW, it
was -14°F that morning in North Georgia. Again the sunspots were at a minimum.

The winters of 2008, 2009, and 2010 were brutal. Ask about all the snowfall in
the Sierra Nevada Mountains those winters; so much that when the spring thaw
came the water falls at Yosemite were spectacular!

Finally I offer one more example, if you have ever read the books of Laura
Ingalls Wilder, you will find one entitled, "The Long Winter," where they
endured 7 months of blizzards during the winter of 1880-1881. As an exercise
to the reader, I will let you go check the sunspot cycle for that period of
time.

Solar cycle 24 is a dud-that's the current cycle we have now. You wonder why
the last 2 winters up North have been so brutal? Why Boston's snow pile just
melted? Why in Dallas TX they had their first 100 degree day on the 26th day
of June and also got 17 inches of rain in May? Why the ice is building in the
Artic? The planet is cooling is why. Sorry, but the laws of Thermodynamics
prevent increasing heat from making more ice, and anyone who suggests
otherwise is a damn fool and more than likely a charlatan out to con you out
of your money.

Tony mentions first and second order effects of things. That's exactly how we
engineers look at things. Here's a clue: the first order effect on our weather
is the SUN. QED.

Reply

        
                  77. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/2cd9150151eb19214f1ac6174688a2e2?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Chyrol says:
        

August 2, 2015 at 6:34 am

Steve Goddard/Tony Heller, What are you thoughts on any of James Lovelock;s
books (Gaia theory). I find his books (and Lynn Margulis "Symbiotic Planet")
to be scientifically and educationally concrete as an introduction to the
potential of the anthropocene effect.

Reply

        
                  78. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ab72f2130dd22afee2980ad481089be2?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Grant says:
        

September 20, 2015 at 6:21 am

"The claims of 97% consensus are a massive lie. Only 52% of American
Meteorological Society members believe that man is the primary contributor to
global warming."

I'm curious as to where you received this statistic? Also, wondering if you
have any consensus data on Meteorological/Climate scientist residing outside
of the U.S.?

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

September 20, 2015 at 5:27 pm

The information you are referring to probably comes from a misinterpretation
of a 2014 study published by the American Meteorological Society (AMS). Here
is a good discussion of the study which contains a link to it.

http://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-
cent/2013/dec/02/meteorologists-global-warming-consensus

Note that the article says, "Predictably, many climate contrarians have
already misrepresented this paper. In fact, the Heartland Institute (of
Unabomber billboard infamy) misrepresented the study so badly (and arguably
impersonated the AMS in a mass emailing), the AMS executive director (who is a
co-author of the paper) took the unusual step of issuing a public reprimand
against their behavior."

Reply

        
                  79. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f5af4f59793b846194ad729146dbb900?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) George V says:
        

September 21, 2015 at 8:21 pm

http://www.sott.net/article/277349-Top-scientist-resigns-from-post-admits-
Global-Warming-is-a-scam

Reply

        
                  80. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/80268acaa30e61b414dbe6195001ef9c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Mark says:
        

September 21, 2015 at 11:08 pm

I like to debate too, do you have anything to say about research on population
collapse/reduction. Years ago, sometime during 1980, I looked up and found
very few studies about overpopulation. I found an article about deer
population on an island, a geographically isolated place. I read it, it made
observations about the deer population over time after a season where food was
hard to come by ((tough winter) and the deer population decreased by a large
amount. It seems to me that human overpopulation is the most significant issue
worldwide. If a population of critters becomes stressed by food or water
shortages, then immune systems might be weak enough to generate an epidemic
for some disease that fits the population. Also, any resource stress might
cause war to break out, and nuclear or biological war has quick and large
casualties.

Reply

        
                  81. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/edf613c40cf9dc6d28a6bec2cedd4c5c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) AJ says:
        

October 6, 2015 at 12:16 am

It seems that the AGW debate is much like the "early years" of the
atheist/creationist debate. A relatively small group of people who believe in
evolution (in comparison to the opposing party) debunk creationist rhetoric
using ACTUAL logic, and are met with hatred and fury.

Replace "small group of people who believe in evolution" with "skeptics" and
replace "creationist" with "alarmist", and there ya go.

Reply

        
                  82. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fe3380c7b3de853275743d25d8f9af53?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) gnssaidednavigation says:
        

November 2, 2015 at 1:08 am

I don't know much about climatology but as an electrical engineer working on
control systems I know enough about simulations to realize that it's very easy
to build a computer model of a complex system that behaves just as you want it
to. Simply keep tweaking it until you get the desired results. But does this
"prove" anything? Of course not.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

November 13, 2015 at 2:43 pm

It does mean something, though, if you confirm the model with real data.

Reply

        
                      * ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/d73b9c490fcb2e5769770cfd8298db6c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) rbot2 says:
        

March 23, 2016 at 3:42 pm

Or can't.

Reply

        
                  83. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a6b96bde604c770b23ac52f289d2b92c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Gary Novak says:
        

November 12, 2015 at 6:07 am

Four Unquestionable Facts of Global Warming

From http://www.nov83.com

      1. Each carbon dioxide molecule would have to be 2,500°C to heat the atmosphere 1°C. The reason is because the total amount of carbon dioxide in the air is 400 parts per million. That means there are 2,500 air molecules around each CO2 molecule. To heat the atmosphere 1°C, each CO2 molecule would have to be 2,500°C—an impossibility.

No molecule can have a temperature much different than nearby emitting
surfaces or molecules. Using the Stefan-Boltzmann constant to determine
radiation from the earth's surface, as climatologists do, shows the CO2
molecules to be heated 5.73°C. The CO2 temperature misses the required 2,500°C
by a factor of 436.

Climatologists missed the dilution factor. If that were the only error, it
would not have been overlooked. But the entire subject of global warming is
such a total contrivance at the scientific level that nothing real is being
studied.

      1. The amount of energy given off by the surface of the earth is claimed to be 79% radiation and 21% conduction and vaporization of water, as indicated by the Kiehl-Trenberth model published in the documents of the IPCC. Only white hot metals give off that much radiation in an air environment.

A slight correction appeared in the NASA energy budget, which shows 41% of the
energy leaving the earth's surface to be radiation, which again is on the
order of white hot metals. In actuality, the cool surface temperature of 15°C
global average, with a rough surface and some wind, would emit about 1-3% of
its energy as radiation. The exact amount determines the amount of radiation
available to be converted into temperature increase as global warming.
Guessing that wildly on radiation is guessing that wildly on global warming,
and being off by a factor of 40 on the radiation is being off by a factor of
40 on the global warming.

      1. To heat oceans with air requires a ratio of 3483 by volume for same temperatures. The heat capacity for air is 1.2 kj/m³/°C, while for water it is 4180 kj/m³/°C. To heat the oceans 0.2°C to a depth of 350 meters would require air losing 0.2°C to a height of 1,219 kilometers (at constant surface pressure). That's 100 atmospheres. The oceans cannot be heated by the atmosphere.

Melting ice with air is even more absurd, as an additional "heat of fusion" is
required, which is 334 kj/kg, which is an additional 278,000 m³ of air per °C
per m³ of ice. In other words, air in contact with ice sucks the heat out of
the air with no effect upon the ice. With a small amount of ice and a lot of
air, the cool air gets replace with warm air, but on a global scale, the
replacing does not occur. It means ice melting has nothing to do with global
warming.

Hymalayan glaciers are stable, because low level ice melted since the last ice
age, 12,000 years ago, and the ice that is left is at such a high elevation
that warm air cannot get to it.

If climatologists would have missed these numbers by a little bit, there might
be an argument. They didn't miss it by a reasonable enough amount to call it
science.

      1. The atmosphere is cooled by radiation which goes around greenhouse gases. The amount going around doesn't matter. A gate half open won't keep in half the sheep. The cooling occurs until equilibrium is established with the amount of energy coming in from the sun.

The amount of radiation going around greenhouse gases is said in Wikipedia to
be 15-30%. Calculations by climatologists are based upon none going around.
They calculate the amount of radiation getting to the top of the atmosphere
using "radiative transfer equations." Those equations cannot account for
equilibrium, which is an adjustment of every influence upon temperature.

If the amount going around were calculated without equilibrium, there would be
a 100% error in the range (15-30%), while the product of the radiative
transfer equations is said to have about 1% error. That product serves as the
primary effect by carbon dioxide, which no one in science questions. Only
secondary effects are argued.

But the gate is not 15-30% open. Each molecule in the atmosphere radiates
energy, with 15-30% going directly into space. That which is absorbed by
greenhouse gases is re-emitted with 15-30% going into space. It means the gate
is about 99.99% open. The atmosphere cools as fast as heat enters it leaving
very low temperatures in equilibrium with the sun's energy. The equilibrium
temperatures are very cold, because heat leaves in all directions during all
hours, while it enters from one direction, half the time. The energy from the
sun lands on the surface (mostly), while it leaves from the entire atmosphere
at a depth of 12-15 kilometers.

Details are here: http://nov83.com/gbwm/fourp.html

Gary Novak  
Independent Scientist  
http://www.nov83.com

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

November 14, 2015 at 3:57 pm

This essay is full of mistakes. For example, take your first paragraph. The
absorption of heat radiation by CO2 can be MEASURED. This was first done by
John Tyndall in 1859. For a good explanation of the physics of climate change
you should visit the American Institute of Physics website at
https://www.aip.org/history/climate/co2.htm.

Reply

        
                  84. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/7c937c537c61499d633c9d98bce86345?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) ralfellis says:
        

January 6, 2016 at 10:57 am

Re: Modulation of Ice Ages via Precession and Dust-Albedo Feedbacks

A new paper proving that CO2 is a minor player in the drama that is the
Earth's climate.

Abstract

We present here a simple and novel proposal for the modulation and rhythm of
ice ages and interglacials during the late Pleistocene. While the standard
Milankovitch-precession theory fails to explain the long intervals between
interglacials, these can be accounted for by a novel forcing and feedback
system involving CO2, dust and albedo. During the glacial period, the high
albedo of the northern ice sheets drives down global temperatures and CO2
concentrations, despite subsequent precessional forcing maxima. Over the
following millennia CO2 is sequestered in the oceans and atmospheric
concentrations eventually reach a critical minima of about 200 ppm, which
causes a die-back of temperate and boreal forests and grasslands, especially
at high altitude. The ensuing soil erosion generates dust storms, resulting in
increased dust deposition and lower albedo on the northern ice sheets. As
northern hemisphere insolation increases during the next Milankovitch cycle,
the dust-laden ice-sheets absorb considerably more insolation and undergo
rapid melting, which forces the climate into an interglacial period. The
proposed mechanism is simple, robust, and comprehensive in its scope, and its
key elements are well supported by empirical evidence.

https://www.academia.edu/20051643/Modulation_of_Ice_Ages_via_Precession_and_Dust-
Albedo_Feedbacks

Sincerely,  
Ralph Ellis

Reply

        
                  85. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/987b8775a22460124500f23fda258cbb?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Scott Larsen says:
        

January 30, 2016 at 12:33 am

Thank you for supporting real science. It is so frustrating to watch
scientists sell out on the pure process of scientific discovery where data
points to new questions and research with cautious conclusions. It is like
science has fallen back 400 years where real scientific research was punished
because it did not meet the current consensus. Keep it up.

Reply

        
                  86. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/2e97635965c8a7bd1d11cff5613d02e6?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Doug says:
        

February 23, 2016 at 7:24 pm

There is a troll on an Investor Village climate bulletin board named Martin
Smith, alias "Trading Baby" who was banned here for being disruptive and for
lying, as I understand it. He has some technical skills that support his
posts. Many of us believe he is lying or at best, misrepresenting his info,
but none of us have the requisite skills to refute him. Would one of the more
technically trained people here like to visit and pin his ears back?

http://www.investorvillage.com/smbd.asp?mb=11227

The immediate post in question is #32187 regarding standard deviations, but if
you loiter long enough I'm certain that others will spring to your senses.

Thanks,

Reply

        
                  87. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/8a43606498775b355190dc4bc122d9af?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Yohan says:
        

March 7, 2016 at 4:26 am

If you want to be respected, get a degree in climatology (phd), post- doc 4
years, get a research position, get 1M Grant, publish in rated journals, and
push your theory through peers. In the mean time, you're a kid with key board.

Reply

        
                  88. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/2a6aff7bd573f24bdfd2e900159e50af?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) tfdpsu1982 says:
        

March 9, 2016 at 12:55 am

Why do you use a pseudonym?

Anyway. When I lived near Penn State in the early 90's a friend was getting
his PhD in meteorology. He said Penn State was the best in the country. It
seemed like I just started to hear about global warming so I mentioned to him
that all during the 70's we were taught that the world is headed for another
ice age. Now we're being told the world is warming. Which is it? His honest
reply to me was surprising. He asked me if I wanted the truth or the answer
that brings in the money! I laughed. Another friend who worked at PSU chimed
in. They both knew I was interested in working for Penn State to raise funds
through estate planning for wealthy alumni. They said that when you board a
plane at the State College Airport, half the plane is filled with people going
out to raise money for various departments. If you say "Steady as she goes,
nothing wrong here" you really don't get much. But if you go out and tell
people the world is ending due to man-made global warming, and we need to fix
it, the checks you come home with are big. They told me The guys back in the
labs with the white coats on need to be paid. Always, always, always follow
the money trail. If the pot of gold is big enough, the white coats will help
paint the narrative almost any way you want.

Wow, I guess the blush fell off the rose for me for my Alma Mater that day.
Little did I know the BS would get exponentially worse in the coming years.

We all know meteorologists take "Lying 101" and "Cover up 102.“ Now Penn State
offers "Shit storm creation 401." Heard you can make pretty good money at
that!

I follow you on Twitter. I Always retweet. Keep up the good work telling the
truth!

Reply

        
                  89. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/cc1d5c83e62303f9f30e2472817d064d?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Scottish Sceptic says:
        

March 13, 2016 at 8:32 am

Tony, I was just reading another article on WUWT which whether intentionally
or not was legitimising the bogus temperature data, because there is (as yet)
no alternative other than to use the bogus surface data back to the 19th
century.

So, I was wondering whether it would be possible to produce a year by year
figure back to say 1850 and perhaps up to 2015, such that we sceptics have a
credible dataset of temperature we can use for graphs and other analysis.

Obviously no one but us sceptics would use it (or as we may well be the
majority, perhaps I should say everyone but the alarmists). However, I am just
getting fed up with having no alternative but to use knowingly fabricated
dataset when displaying global temperature.

Reply

        
                  90. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1c85e536fcdd29244c6639cbe4380409?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Mike Hamblet says:
        

March 13, 2016 at 12:22 pm

With rapidly increasing temps, melting ice and more extreme floods and
droughts, is there any point in this kind of post or this WUwT site? Seriously
- its very clear what's happening now, is 'Real Science now complete bull?

Reply

        
                  91. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/62d72942d474e3ab1d90a70c89d8cc72?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Jerry says:
        

March 13, 2016 at 4:06 pm

You have to go to the sources of the data (papers in the literature and they
are many) and evaluate each one. If you are going to rely on secondary
sources, you have to decide who you trust to sort through the mountains of
data. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was created to
solve this problem. I suggest you start with the Wikipedia entry at,  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intergovernmental_Panel_on_Climate_Change  
If you prefer simplistic, off-the-top-of-the-head opinions, there are plenty
of non-scientists on this site who will be happy to waste your time.

Reply

        
                  92. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1c85e536fcdd29244c6639cbe4380409?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Mike Hamblet says:
        

March 23, 2016 at 6:07 pm

Califoenia drying and burning, Alaska and permafrost thawing and Miami
threatened by rising water. You can go back to sleep if you want to but don't
deny real changes.

Reply

        
                  93. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/5c60f5c59b207c20401189f3c160aeda?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Peter Glick says:
        

March 30, 2016 at 10:34 pm

we are all going to jail:

Cal. Law Could Extend Liability for Past Climate Change Denial  
By Casey C. Sullivan, Esq. on March 30, 2016 3:03 PM  
For decades, fossil fuel companies like ExxonMobil fought to halt climate
change regulations, denying the existence of anthropogenic global warming and
funding outside groups dedicated to stymieing environmental laws. Yet, while
action on climate change stalled and oil and gas profits skyrocketed, recent
reports have revealed that those companies were well aware of the dangers
their products posed to the environment.

Now, a new California bill seeks to hold past climate change deniers
accountable for their actions, by extending the statute of limitations under
California's Unfair Competition Law. If Senate Bill 1161 is adopted, those who
attempted to deceive the public on climate change could be liable for
misleading statements they made decades ago.

Decades of Climate Change Denial

Few serious-minded people would deny the science behind climate change today.
Even major oil and gas companies like Royal Dutch Shell and BP have cut ties
with climate change deniers. But a few decades ago, oil companies and their
lobbyists fought strongly against climate change science and regulation.

Exxon often lead that campaign, spending decades opposing regulations that
would curtail global warming. It wasn't until 2014 that the company publicly
acknowledged climate changes' risks.

But, investigations from InsideClimate News and the Union of Concerned
Scientists have revealed that Exxon was well aware of the risks of climate
change, as early as 1977.

Taking Accountability Back a Few Years

California's proposed bill seeks to hold climate change deniers accountable
for those past acts. SB 1161, the Climate Science Truth and Accountability
Act, would extend the statute of limitations under California's Unfair
Competition Law from four to 30 years.

That law imposes liability for "any unlawful, unfair or fraudulent business
act or practice." The extended statute of limitations could allow state and
local prosecutors to bring actions against companies such as ExxonMobil for
deceptive acts reaching back to the 1980's.

But, that extension is a limited one. It applies only "with respect to
scientific evidence regarding the existence, extent, or current or future
impacts of anthropogenic induced climate change." And while the state's Unfair
Competition Act contains a private cause of action, the extension only applies
to actions brought by public prosecutors.

While California considers whether to adopt the bill, ExxonMobil faces similar
troubles on the East Coast. Attorney generals in New York, Massachusetts, and
the Virgin Islands, have already opened their own investigations into whether
ExxonMobil intentionally mislead investigators, investors, and the public
about climate change.

Related Resources:

Thirty Years of Climate 'Deception' Could Become Offense Under New Calif. Law
(InsideClimate News)  
California Debates Carbon Taxes and Chromium Limits (FindLaw's California Case
Law)  
What Triggers the Unfair Competition Statute of Limitations? (FindLaw's
California Case Law)  
Drought Continues, CA Institutes Agricultural Water Reductions (FindLaw's
California Case Law)  
- See more at: http://blogs.findlaw.com/california_case_law/2016/03/cal-law-could-extend-liability-for-past-climate-change-denial.html#sthash.RFwjF9v6.dpuf

Reply

        
                  94. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/04d9f34bf5171ea4f9a0d3ef6109a184?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Gary Novak says:
        

April 5, 2016 at 5:10 am

Citizen's Committee on Nuclear Energy

The only answer to the energy problem is responsible nuclear energy. The
primary argument of opponents is that responsible is not possible with nuclear
energy. If not, they can kiss their ass goodbye, because there is no solution
at insect standards.

Governments clearly cannot produce responsible nuclear energy at this time.
This isn't because of something about nuclear energy, it's because of
something about power structures including governments. Power structures suck
in incompetents who shove out rational persons.

The solution is to get control of the process apart from government. This
requires a citizen's committee. For controlling nuclear energy, there should
be a committee of twenty four persons who have no connections to sources of
corruption including related industries, organizations or bureaucracies. Each
member should be elected for any number of four year terms. A member could be
elected by a district consisting of several congressional districts, no
residency required.

A similar committee should be created for setting scientific standards and
issuing scientific research grants.

The committee for controlling nuclear energy should be located in
Indianapolis, Indiana, or similar moderate size city, away from the corruptive
influences of larger cities such as Chicago. The committee for scientific
standards and grants should be located in Vermont, New Hampshire or Maine,
where there are no strongly developed social forces including the corruptive
influences of major universities.

These committees will not work as advisers to the slime in government. They
will only work as replacements for the slime in government.

Gary Novak  
http://www.nov83.com  
Free Book: Science Errors: How Incompetents Took Over Science and Left
Wreckage and Ruin

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/56b9b7ffdb46a8179708d6c91871037c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Ron Lewis says:
        

April 12, 2016 at 2:39 pm

Your committees sound like political bodies to me.

The only solution is to get rid of politicians, educate the populace, and
implement full democracy. Those committees have a purpose in percolating ideas
and solutions, but any solution should be subject to full democracy. Also, the
citizens should have the right through petition to override committees and
raise issues/solutions without committee support.

Of course, that would require revolution first, and a lot of dead people.

Reply

        
                  95. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/fa555eb87cbc9e7d5c26697b8df527a5?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Bill Butler says:
        

April 10, 2016 at 11:55 pm

“Fraud and Deceit by “Steven Goddard””

“Steven Goddard (whose real name is Tony Heller
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steven_Goddard ) runs the realclimatescience dot
com website. Goddard (Heller) is another typical Global Warming Denier in that
he uses deceit/fraud to promote the denier agenda.”

See http://www.durangobill.com/GwdLiars/GwdGlobalWarmingStoppedIn1998.html
(near the bottom of the page) for analysis on how Steven Goddard (whose real
name is Tony Heller) has FRAUDULENTLY misrepresented NOAA data for his
assertion that “NOAA Radiosonde Data Shows No Warming For 58 Years”.

“There are several examples of outright fraud in Steven Goddard’s (real name
Tony Heller) presentation.”

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/56b9b7ffdb46a8179708d6c91871037c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Ron Lewis says:
        

April 11, 2016 at 12:26 am

So, help me, please, being a non-scientist but committed realist. You claim
that those who deny global warming lie and manipulate data. I've read of
several instances of global warming believers being caught lying, making
exaggerated predictions of disaster, and manipulating and/or conspiring to
manipulate data. Why would I believe one side over the other? Why would I not
conclude that whatever truth there is has been commandeered by politicians
from both sides ostensibly arguing, but in reality divying up between
themselves, the accompanying power and wealth that will be transferred by all
the so-called "solutions" to the alleged crisis? And finally, lacking a
trustworthy advisor (no, I don't worship "scientists"), and not tending
towards zealotry, why would I not choose the path of no change?

Reply

        
                  96. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/1c85e536fcdd29244c6639cbe4380409?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Mike Hamblet says:
        

April 11, 2016 at 2:56 pm

Feel free to not change - while the climate changes around you and society
becomes increasingly disrupted and uncertain. Feel free to believe a few
weirdos against all governments and most scientists, academics and writers.

Reply

        
                    * ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/56b9b7ffdb46a8179708d6c91871037c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Ron Lewis says:
        

April 12, 2016 at 12:25 pm

Hmm, I'm assuming you were an Art History major in college, right? No logical,
empirical thinker would answer a question that hypothesizes a lack of credible
scientists and academics by referencing those same non-credible sources. I'd
repeat my question in the hope that iteration might inspire a more intelligent
answer, but I'm afraid you'd next reference unicorns with pixie dust.

Government bureaucrats are corrupt, and like everyone promoting global
warming, they have an inherent conflict of interest - they want "big
government" and more government control, and the global warming solutions
proposed support that agenda. "Scientists," to the extent there are any in
this era of proliferating diploma mills, lowered academic qualifications, and
big money research sponsors, rarely prove anything and have been wrong more
times than the Bible. They haven't proven global warming is a concern, and
like your greatly exaggerated crisis scenario ("climate changes around
you…increasingly disrupted and uncertain"), every crisis they have predicted
has not happened.

A reasonable person with minimal knowledge of this issue should be skeptical
that to the extent global warming is a problem, the solutions recommended are
not politicized. A reasonable person with minimal knowledge of how corrupt our
political system is, should be very, very skeptical that the crisis is not
exaggerated and the "solutions" aren't politicized. But, a political scientist
(my field of study) should be absolutely certain that corruption on both sides
of the global warming issue has rendered the entire issue meaningless - a
reasonable non-zealot shouldn't believe either side's claims and certainly
shouldn't support one of the political wealth-transferring "solutions" knowing
that it's real purpose is only wealth transfer and any effect on climate will
be minimal at best.

Reply

        
                  97. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/4684524cce9b23385c5cffdfcd07e17c?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) JPinBalt says:
        

April 12, 2016 at 10:15 am

Tony,  
Here is another hodwinked AGW religious idiot, political science prof., .. the
end of the world is coming, .. burn and silence the infadels and nonbelievers
…  
Michael E. Kraft: Climate-change deniers deserve punishment  
http://www.providencejournal.com/opinion/20160411/michael-e-kraft-climate-
change-deniers-deserve-punishment/?  
You may want to comment.

Reply

        
                  98. ![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/f42073e4dc1d8218c9efb92453f34fd7?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) Dr. Bruce A. Kershaw 40 years atmospheric emission control science and testing says:
        

May 15, 2016 at 9:37 pm

Tony,  
thank you for all of your honest hard work ~  
do you know what an E.G.R. Valve is ?  
this is science enforced by the EPA since the 1970's and proves CO2 causes
cooling  
just like frozen CO2 = Dry Ice  
if you replace 1% of the Nitrogen in a combustion chamber with CO2 it lowers
the explosion temperature 500* to lower NOx to lower O3 heavy oxygen = ozone
at ground level  
to lower respiratory illness  
if we replaced 1% of the nitrogen in the air with CO2 your car would not start
and idle  
but will run above idle after it is warmed up first  
I have made 100's of emails to the EPA since 2007 with no reply  
as the political wing of the EPA does not comprehend the science they enforce  
or ignore it ~  
Bruce

Reply

        
                  99. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/8ae6c557d6237bae0e0c530ffaf8c591?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) frederikwisse says:
        

June 11, 2016 at 6:23 pm

May there be justice Tony , although sometimes it is hard to believe that
tomorrow may bring a better world . Today I tried to write a comment on your
latest Clinton story , however I did bot come through as my computer was
notified that your site was unreacheable , which much to my regret has
happened before …… The real reason of this email is that there is an as yet
unnoticed side to the behaviour of Barack Obama . Suppose Hillary wins the US
elections , which nearly all polls nowadays are forecasting , what would then
be the next move of your present president ?  
Together with his DOJ-dummey he may declare that the FBI has a legal case
against the Hillbillies since they were acting in contempt with US laws and
that she must stand trial first before she can be inaugurated as US president
and if indicted by a court she must first accept the punishment before she can
be crowned to US president . Obama will declare that the law must be obeyed
and in the meantime he will sacrifice himself by staying the US president . Am
I thinking too devious ?  
Hardly possible with such a cold calculater as Barack Obama . Tough times may
lay ahead of us all .

Reply

        
                  100. ![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/8d57b044e648f4861fea769cee2b0ee1?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) retiredphysicseducator says:
        

November 2, 2016 at 2:58 am

I look forward to meeting you next Tuesday and Thursday. I'd like to ask you
why you agree with IPCC that atmospheric radiation can be added to solar
radiation and the total used to determine surface temperature, when Wien's
Displacement Law makes it clear that cannot be done, and the Stefan-Boltzmann
Law is based on the integral of a single Planck function. If one electric bar
radiator at a given distance warms you to 315K, would 16 such radiators roast
you at 630K? I'll stake my life on the fact they won't and stand in front of
them.

Reply

        
                  101. ![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/16fa228681cc89a8e8cd851aff00282b?s=40&d=identicon&r=G) ilma630 says:
        

November 25, 2016 at 6:10 pm

Was a pleasure to finally meet you this week in London. Keep up the great work
and I hope that Mr Trump recognises the importance of it and provides a
platform for you to enable the restoration of proper scientific debate and
discourse.

Reply

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Enter your comment here...

Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:

        
                  *       *       *       *       * ![Gravatar](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=G)
        

Email (required) (Address never made public)

Name (required)

Website

![WordPress.com

Logo](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=G)

****You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. ( Log Out / Change )

![Google

photo](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=G)

****You are commenting using your Google account. ( Log Out / Change )

![Twitter

picture](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=G)

****You are commenting using your Twitter account. ( Log Out / Change )

![Facebook

photo](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/ad516503a11cd5ca435acc9bb6523536?s=25&d=identicon&forcedefault=y&r=G)

****You are commenting using your Facebook account. ( Log Out / Change )

Cancel

Connecting to %s

Notify me of new comments via email.

Notify me of new posts via email.

        
                  * ### Disrupting the Borg is expensive and time consuming!
        

![Donate Button with Credit

Cards](https://www.paypal.com/en_US/i/btn/btn_donateCC_LG.gif)

        
                  * Search for:
        
          * ### Recent Posts
        
            * Toto Has Moved!
            * Cooling Nuuk
            * Escape The Heat At Your Local Movie Theater
            * Charles Butler Interview – May 2, 2016
            * Massive Greenland Fraud Is Rapidly Growing
            * More Detail On The NSIDC Disappearing Ice
            * 1995 IPCC Report Showed No Troposphere Warming From 1958 To 1995
            * More On The NSIDC Disappearing Ice
            * Climate Hustle Today
            * On The Air Monday
            * NOAA Quadrupling Radiosonde Temperatures By Data Tampering
            * Skiing Is A Thing Of The Past
            * Alarmist Brains Depleted Of Oxygen
            * Climate Scam Being Driven By Politicians/Actors/Journalists
            * 1905 : Valdez, Alaska Relocated Due To Glacial Melting
            * Today's Climate Fraud Winners - Science News
            * Most Influential Climate Denier On Twitter
            * SCIENCE : 230 Years Of Blaming White Men For Climate Change
            * Battling Climate Misinformation In Santa Fe
            * 1906 : Belief In Climate Change Is Due To Defective Memories
            * Oswald's Rifle?
            * The Arctic Is Ice Free - How Can Sea Ice Be Declining?
            * Climate Hustle Next Monday - One Night Only
            * The Surface Temperature Record Is A Farce
            * NASA - Doubling Sea Level Rise By Data Tampering
          * June 2019 M | T | W | T | F | S | S
        

---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
« May | |  
| 1| 2  
3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9  
10| 11| 12| 13| 14| 15| 16  
17| 18| 19| 20| 21| 22| 23  
24| 25| 26| 27| 28| 29| 30

        
                  * ### Email Subscription
        

Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications
of new posts by email.

Join 1,949 other followers

Sign me up!

        
                  * ### Recent Comments
        

![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a3ac60eb6d5a04fd006fe15506edb55a?s=48&d=identicon&r=G)|
gator69 on A Proof That Greenhouse Gas Dr…  
---|---  
![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a3ac60eb6d5a04fd006fe15506edb55a?s=48&d=identicon&r=G)|
gator69 on Toto Has Moved!  
![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/9d8e5744da87368c6b8c6cf6f6c8bfbb?s=48&d=identicon&r=G)|
Menicholas on Toto Has Moved!  
![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e5a5889f6b2982f390870a68cc2d7274?s=48&d=identicon&r=G)|
Sir Charles on A Proof That Greenhouse Gas Dr…  
![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/e5a5889f6b2982f390870a68cc2d7274?s=48&d=identicon&r=G)|
Sir Charles on A Proof That Greenhouse Gas Dr…  
![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/49bbe405f31b68709337a6c312460b05?s=48&d=identicon&r=G)|
Ed Darrell on Phil Jones Removing The 1940…  
![](https://1.gravatar.com/avatar/a3ac60eb6d5a04fd006fe15506edb55a?s=48&d=identicon&r=G)|
gator69 on Christmas Eve 1955 Was Much…  
![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/629dd140a7f69cdd4435c585910d2eb9?s=48&d=identicon&r=G)|
transrp on Christmas Eve 1955 Was Much…  
![](https://2.gravatar.com/avatar/2fa2f3dd1df9a0c59105cab8e4b489c4?s=48&d=identicon&r=G)|
Don Gaddes on Seven Year Drought Killed 40%…  
![](https://0.gravatar.com/avatar/9ab7a643fe07a7af9bcb6826fd1fd39a?s=48&d=identicon&r=G)|
Jamie Spry on Seven Year Drought Killed 40%…

Advertisements

        
                  * Real Science
        

Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com.

Post to

Cancel

Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address

![loading](https://s2.wp.com/wp-content/mu-plugins/post-

flair/sharing/images/loading.gif) Cancel

Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

Email check failed, please try again

Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website,
you agree to their use.  
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here: Cookie Policy

%d bloggers like this:

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

