

Skip to main content

Search

Show only documents Sort by date

![Home](https://www.pca.state.mn.us/sites/default/files/mpca-logo.png)

Toggle navigation

Search

Show only documents Sort by date

        
                  * Air 
            * How's the air?
            * Business and industry
            * Current air quality
            * Climate change in Minnesota
            * Air data and tools
          * Water 
            * How's the water?
            * Citizen's guide to regulations
            * Permitting and regulations
            * Resources for water partners
            * Water quality data
          * Waste 
            * Cleanup
            * Hazardous waste and problem materials
            * Managing solid waste
            * Recycling and composting
            * Permits and rules
            * Preventing waste and pollution
            * Publications
          * Regulations 
            * Rules
            * Permits
            * Guidance and assistance
            * Environmental review
            * Enforcement
            * Small Business Environmental Assistance
          * Living Green 
            * Celebrations
            * Community
            * Family and pets
            * Home and garden
            * Personal action
            * Travel and leisure
            * Living Green 365
          * Quick links 
            * Feedlots
            * Mining
          * Data 
            * e-Services
            * Contaminated sites
            * Hazardous waste
            * Petroleum storage tanks
            * Environmental Quality Information System (EQuIS)
            * Related links
            * Spatial data
            * Waste and recycling
            * What's in My Neighborhood
          * About the MPCA 
            * About the MPCA
            * Questions and assistance
            * News and media
            * Legislative resources
            * Contractor and subcontracting guidance
            * Jobs at the MPCA
            * MPCA Advisory Committee
            * Training events
            * Publications
            * Councils and forums
        
          1. Air
          2. How's the air?
          3. Air pollutants and sources
          4. Air pollutants
        

# Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)

Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and halons
destroy the earth's protective ozone layer, which shields the earth from
harmful ultraviolet (UV-B) rays generated from the sun. CFCs and HCFCs also
warm the lower atmosphere of the earth, changing global climate.
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) also act to warm the planet. The Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency (MPCA) is working with industry, residents and government to
reduce the damage done to the ozone layer and global climate by CFCs, HCFCs,
HFCs and related chemicals.

## Why are CFCs and HFCs bad for the environment?

### Ozone depletion

Man-made compounds such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrofluorocarbons
(HCFCs) and halons destroy ozone in the upper atmosphere (stratosphere). The
stratospheric ozone layer makes life possible by shielding the earth from
harmful ultraviolet (UV-B) rays generated from the sun. Decreased
concentration of stratospheric ozone allows increased amounts of UV-B to reach
the earth's surface.

Stratospheric ozone loss can result in potential harm to human health and the
environment, including:

        
                  * increased incidence of skin cancer and cataracts
          * immune system system damage
          * damage to terrestrial and aquatic plant life
          * increased formation of ground-level ozone (smog)
        

Most stratospheric ozone depletion is caused when chlorine or bromine reacts
with ozone. Most of the chlorine entering the stratosphere is from man-made
sources (84%), such as CFCs and HCFCs with the remaining 16% from natural
sources, such as the ocean and volcanoes. About half of bromine entering the
stratosphere is from man-made sources, mostly Halons.

### Climate change

While acting to destroy ozone, CFCs and HCFCs also act to trap heat in the
lower atmosphere, causing the earth to warm and climate and weather to change.
HFCs, which originally were developed to replace CFCs and HCFCs, also absorb
and trap infrared radiation or heat in the lower atmosphere of the earth.
HFCs, CFCs and HFCs are a subset of a larger group of climate changing gases
called greenhouse gases (GHGs). Taken together greenhouse gases are expected
to warm the planet by 2.5 to 8 degrees Fahrenheit by the end of century.

HFCs, CFCs and HFCs contribute an estimated 11.5% to present-day effect of
GHGs on climate and climate change. Some effects of global climate change
include:

        
                  * Rising sea levels
          * Local natural species extinctions and habitat loss
          * More frequent heavy rainfall and flooding
          * High heat stress in summer
          * Increasing health risk from insect and water-borne diseases
        

The production of CFCs in the United Stated or their import was prohibited as
of January 1, 1996. Use of CFCs is restricted to equipment placed into use
prior to 1996. The production or import of HCFC-22 and HCFC-142b for use in
new units or applications was banned in the US as of January 1, 2010, although
production and import for use in existing equipment is allowed through 2019.
The production or import of HCFC-141b for any purpose were prohibited as of
January 1, 2004.

Most HFC uses in new units or applications are being phased out under USEPA
Rules over a staggered schedule that begins in 2016 and stretches through
2024. Under these Rules, most HFC uses in polyurethane and other foams and in
new retail food refrigerated cases will be phased out between January 1, 2016
and January 1 2020. Use of HFCs in mobile air conditioning will end with Model
Year 2020, while prohibitions on HFC use in new fire suppression systems, cold
storage, residential refrigeration, and building chillers go into place on
January 1 of 2018, 2021, 2023 and 2024, respectively.

Use of HFCs in existing equipment is unaffected by EPA regulations. Minnesota
has an estimated 12 million residential appliances and car air conditioners
that contain a total of about 13,000 tons of CFCs, HCFCs and HFCs.

Regulations are in place to help prevent the release of CFCs, HCFCs and HFCs
into the environment. In addition to the various production bans, servicers
and disposers of appliances and motor vehicle air conditioners are required to
obtain technician certification, proper refrigerant recovery or recycling
equipment, and keep records.

## Additional information

        
                  * Climate change in Minnesota
          * Report Environmental Violations (US EPA) – Lodge a complaint related to CFCs or other ozone-depleting substances
          * Significant New Alternatives Policy (US EPA) – Information on recent EPA rulemakings on HFC and HCFC production and use prohibitions
          * 2014 Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion (World Meteorological Organization) – The science of ozone depletion
          * Fifth Assessment Report (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Changes) – Global warming and greenhouse gases
          * Technical information for handling refrigerants – Businesses that service, dispose of, and recycle appliances and vehicle air conditioners
        

## Contact us

651-296-6300 or 800-657-3864

        
                  * Email us
          * Staff directory
          * Regional offices
        

### Environmental emergencies (24 hrs)

800-422-0798

## Social

        
                  * Facebook
          * Twitter
          * YouTube
        

Sign up for Gov Delivery emails on many MPCA topics

## Tools

        
                  * Assistance (How can we help?)
          * Ask us a question
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

