

Skip to main content

![Energy.Gov](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAFIAAAANCAQAAACQ/fEyAAAFNUlEQVRIx22Va2yURRSGp8tuabel29KlsNqgJo0CWqxIIEaDSkI0UTBgxBhMxAhoUqTCDxPlT8OlIibeSL2BEIGIIVohoAIxeEFAoAWUtIAtVCjbdvfb+32/3Znje2Z3ewFnsp05M8935p0zZ6aCBkdUL02jC2jbSKB+QR46QbWjCA/sgXy/n3poPVk0+wxdJD8FyaBWKqbv0Xppjp75GqRB83R/IV0mHygvbQHFIxW0Cz79GP2T7qdycoM+qGcE1h6kTsEFDoZL0phJN9CGY0+KIjpEpPr76oAOl+hNdlJuArmSItqS+JnqSKyBQvj2arOVHoQkUueFTYyhplHUT/iuhC5pK6vHg4lZ1I7Wd6oac5MhnbJ78WWRFpk+7d2g6/rWOuXWftzNdnUY7cDh+5SHKHU0R3jWNdeybXZ4N/jfVyyg79B4dqeCgU03VktsQCX+rk/upIxKRNZQJ+zQDzOFo60mT7WAMpi6eg81k0lmprPv9cgOFcXYlegKSlHa1yis9BZJFe54QowTVi0y8Vv3G1earjR1LRPVWqRU6fjG7BHsZHDPAywqdjBHnH1BjGc79M3Ghu/mSPSybmM5pSnR86pwiUl/LEi1Bz7dW/+2SwuJUpTM0GdikqiKL4egePcrTJ1cBKp13zTVDcY39w4ei+5H339stgogBOdFCRKDpMfuEo68yEKRHjFOi8zynmXHsMgh4qooZ1uGpR9xzKp0YGf4E17qgxl7Zme65D/ZbrOnc7Eov/6yiukvBh67U0wQdtmKvm9zwzB16TmFuJsXILFaONyNCE3s/CLzOLjQ8QZkKQV3iRpRJixapIxgSZ/yQUIZi0yekdGcqIJILQpE5jQItiMqxdPRb++dHIJI6f9q1rmH8zlH7kZRKkrNcxAf6XgRcawQVrmFqc9ngAoVKPaU7uItCGt8BYs8++y1l1RCmWY7AhBsmwv5Y/MXx9gmboOriaiVLNLYFjtKiuNZEOl+h48E8zXCwXbkgO8jFUcceqfX9i2jlEpdX/1LnbnbPKIgtG8lRNoSHDv/iilYqEQUJZcydW3VSEr2gggsqRW46QrHLYPbZyys4QPP3QusyIedE5k809+SuxgnZrFI/9Z19TI4MpKJX3OEse7AFLYDu4QreQaRSgU/fK9G8ZUIJd4NvZa5yBHuXSXKxRhTx67x7hP1qo0ePVWtqXC8BdSlHBXYjDzNZLoQxe0Uxmr/Igjl6cNao/K1wrLjsG96gii+LCdSOL0b2NHNOUmmfx7bwZ1iQutUGeDcPTk1uEpFhx4XZNSx+Swy+zGLXF2X2YfBbmENrhlFhX9/apEr26OfH/0EqdDPT+PoS435nM0y9OVDOINi/U4qj/RyVR5Un7FEdkpff4uofKTK/Et6U+1bp48ijJ7H1aD0DWwWlaJssEn6ZCC+Q5R1LjYv8lWSRuwAnE+ESEtmrTKkd+VdxgI1GF2LmNi7njcvgwpIb3S/phxv1ob3SEMFlN88++NcpFSVsC0tkb28ci6XtUhodYrbdU5ydWLxCToXxuKFmohxJ1AnWleewE3ME8XIPCfGnZA0DmM5woU6nrMQC1Roj3bMOsGXgBumJoEqxVhV3nJpT3y8FtzoGmhCVOFFF5sWUahVcFiJv7hvEOGApAr0HSOISiyVI8aglmEp7hejV6XneROlmBH42THG4thDGTxab6EsCEYFLB6pzH9XNLSyTeSLBd3ioWqDIxv/EwNapIVy/1aiOE/k5qx6/wXKqpNd6FnmLZrK8f9HWYc8W0Zpshbi+B+u7rWtlqj2/AAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

        
                  * National Labs
          * Energy.gov Offices
        

Search

![Energy.Gov](/sites/all/themes/clean_energy/images/xlogo_seal.png.pagespeed.ic.QGU1NhCz3x.png)

Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy

        
                  * About Us
        

About Us

        
                    * Blog
            * News
              * News Releases
              * Photographs
            * Leadership
            * Budget
              * Development & Implementation
              * Performance Planning & Management
              * Archives
            * History
            * EERE Offices
            * Business Operations
              * Workforce Management Office
              * Information & Technology Services Office
              * Project Management Coordination Office
                * Methods & Process Stewardship
                * Project Portfolio Oversight
                * Competency Management & Cross-Cutting Activities
                * Operations, Audit Resolution, & Internal Controls
              * Golden Field Office
                * Golden Field Office Reading Room
                * Contact Us
              * National Environmental Policy Act
              * Contact Us
            * Strategic Programs
              * Policy & Analysis
              * International
                * International Partnerships & Projects
              * Stakeholder Engagement
              * Communications
              * Legislative Affairs
              * Contact Us
            * Initiatives & Projects
            * Success Stories
            * Employment Opportunities
              * Working at EERE
              * Job Vacancies
              * Internships & Fellowships
              * Related Links
            * FAQs
            * Contact Us
        
          * Initiatives
        

eere Home

        
                  * About Us
          * Initiatives
        
          * Services
        

Services

        
                    * Services Home
            * Careers and Education
            * Energy Analysis
            * Funding
            * Publications
            * Small Business Program
            * States & Local Communities
            * Technical Assistance
        
          * Efficiency
        

Efficiency

        
                    * Efficiency Home
            * Advanced Manufacturing
            * Buildings
            * Government Energy Management
        
          * Renewables
        

Renewables

        
                    * Renewables Home
            * Solar
            * Geothermal
            * Wind
            * Water
        
          * Transportation
        

Transportation

        
                    * Transportation Home
            * Bioenergy
            * Hydrogen & Fuel Cells
            * Vehicles
        

![Energy.Gov

Home](/sites/all/themes/clean_energy/images/xlogo_header_black.png.pagespeed.ic.3yVarQICOz.png)

        
                  * National Labs
          * Energy.gov Offices
        
          * Solar Energy Technologies Office
        
          * About the Solar Energy Technologies Office
        
            * Goals
            * Key Activities
            * History
            * Staff
            * Awards
            * Fellowships
            * Visiting the Office
          * Concentrating Solar Power
        
            * Systems
            * Components
            * Competitive Awards
          * Photovoltaics
        
            * Research & Development
            * Competitive Awards
          * Systems Integration
        
            * Planning and Operation
            * Solar Plus X
            * Power Electronics
            * Sensing and Communication
            * Codes and Standards
            * Competitive Awards
          * Soft Costs
        
            * Business Innovation
            * Data Analysis
            * Networking and Technical Assistance
            * Training
            * Competitive Awards
          * Technology to Market
        
            * Solar Business Innovation
            * Solar Manufacturing
            * Solar Hardware
            * Cost Analysis
            * Competitive Awards
          * National Laboratory Research
        
          * Projects Map
        
          * Success Stories
        
          * Funding Opportunities
        
          * Information Resources
        
          * News
        
          * Contact Us
        

# Solar Performance and Efficiency

August 20, 2013

## You are here

Home » Solar Performance and Efficiency

The conversion efficiency of a photovoltaic (PV) cell, or solar cell, is the
percentage of the solar energy shining on a PV device that is converted into
usable electricity. Improving this conversion efficiency is a key goal of
research and helps make PV technologies cost-competitive with conventional
sources of energy.

#### Factors Affecting Conversion Efficiency

Not all of the sunlight that reaches a PV cell is converted into electricity.
In fact, most of it is lost. Multiple factors in solar cell design play roles
in limiting a cell's ability to convert the sunlight it receives. Designing
with these factors in mind is how higher efficiencies can be achieved.

        
                  * **Wavelength** —Light is composed of photons—or packets of energy—that have a wide range of wavelengths and energies. The sunlight that reaches the earth's surface has wavelengths from ultraviolet, through the visible range, to infrared. When light strikes the surface of a solar cell, some photons are reflected, while others pass right through. Some of the absorbed photons have their energy turned into heat. The remainder have the right amount of energy to separate electrons from their atomic bonds to produce charge carriers and electric current.
          * **Recombination** —One way for electric current to flow in a semiconductor is for a "charge carrier," such as a negatively-charged electron, to flow across the material. Another such charge carrier is known as a "hole," which represents the absence of an electron within the material and acts like a positive charge carrier. When an electron encounters a hole, they may recombine and therefore cancel out their contributions to the electrical current. Direct recombination, in which light-generated electrons and holes encounter each other, recombine, and emit a photon, reverses the process from which electricity is generated in a solar cell. It is one of the fundamental factors that limits efficiency. Indirect recombination is a process in which the electrons or holes encounter an impurity, a defect in the crystal structure, or interface that makes it easier for them to recombine and release their energy as heat.
          * **Temperature** —Solar cells generally work best at low temperatures. Higher temperatures cause the semiconductor properties to shift, resulting in a slight increase in current, but a much larger decrease in voltage. Extreme increases in temperature can also damage the cell and other module materials, leading to shorter operating lifetimes. Since much of the sunlight shining on cells becomes heat, proper thermal management improves both efficiency and lifetime.
          * **Reflection** —A cell's efficiency can be increased by minimizing the amount of light reflected away from the cell's surface. For example, untreated silicon reflects more than 30% of incident light. Anti-reflection coatings and textured surfaces help decrease reflection. A high-efficiency cell will appear dark blue or black.
        

#### Determining Conversion Efficiency

Researchers measure the performance of a photovoltaic (PV) device to predict
the power the cell will produce. Electrical power is the product of current
and voltage. Current-voltage relationships measure the electrical
characteristics of PV devices. If a certain "load" resistance is connected to
the two terminals of a cell or module, the current and voltage being produced
will adjust according to Ohm's law (the current through a conductor between
two points is directly proportional to the potential difference across the two
points). Efficiencies are obtained by exposing the cell to a constant,
standard level of light while maintaining a constant cell temperature, and
measuring the current and voltage that are produced for different load
resistances.

Learn more about solar photovoltaic cells.

The conversion efficiency of a photovoltaic (PV) cell, or solar cell, is the
percentage of the solar energy shining on a PV device that is converted into
usable electricity. Improving this conversion efficiency is a key goal of
research and helps make PV technologies cost-competitive with conventional
sources of energy.

#### Factors Affecting Conversion Efficiency

Not all of the sunlight that reaches a PV cell is converted into electricity.
In fact, most of it is lost. Multiple factors in solar cell design play roles
in limiting a cell's ability to convert the sunlight it receives. Designing
with these factors in mind is how higher efficiencies can be achieved.

        
                  *  **Wavelength** --Light is composed of photons--or packets of energy--that have a wide range of wavelengths and energies. The sunlight that reaches the earth's surface has wavelengths from ultraviolet, through the visible range, to infrared. When light strikes the surface of a solar cell, some photons are reflected, while others pass right through. Some of the absorbed photons have their energy turned into heat. The remainder have the right amount of energy to separate electrons from their atomic bonds to produce charge carriers and electric current.
          *  **Recombination** --One way for electric current to flow in a semiconductor is for a "charge carrier," such as a negatively-charged electron, to flow across the material. Another such charge carrier is known as a "hole," which represents the absence of an electron within the material and acts like a positive charge carrier. When an electron encounters a hole, they may recombine and therefore cancel out their contributions to the electrical current. Direct recombination, in which light-generated electrons and holes encounter each other, recombine, and emit a photon, reverses the process from which electricity is generated in a solar cell. It is one of the fundamental factors that limits efficiency. Indirect recombination is a process in which the electrons or holes encounter an impurity, a defect in the crystal structure, or interface that makes it easier for them to recombine and release their energy as heat.
          *  **Temperature** --Solar cells generally work best at low temperatures. Higher temperatures cause the semiconductor properties to shift, resulting in a slight increase in current, but a much larger decrease in voltage. Extreme increases in temperature can also damage the cell and other module materials, leading to shorter operating lifetimes. Since much of the sunlight shining on cells becomes heat, proper thermal management improves both efficiency and lifetime.
          *  **Reflection** --A cell's efficiency can be increased by minimizing the amount of light reflected away from the cell's surface. For example, untreated silicon reflects more than 30% of incident light. Anti-reflection coatings and textured surfaces help decrease reflection. A high-efficiency cell will appear dark blue or black.
        

#### Determining Conversion Efficiency

Researchers measure the performance of a photovoltaic (PV) device to predict
the power the cell will produce. Electrical power is the product of current
and voltage. Current-voltage relationships measure the electrical
characteristics of PV devices. If a certain "load" resistance is connected to
the two terminals of a cell or module, the current and voltage being produced
will adjust according to Ohm's law (the current through a conductor between
two points is directly proportional to the potential difference across the two
points). Efficiencies are obtained by exposing the cell to a constant,
standard level of light while maintaining a constant cell temperature, and
measuring the current and voltage that are produced for different load
resistances.

Learn more about solar photovoltaic cells.

OFFICE of ENERGY EFFICIENCY & RENEWABLE ENERGY

Forrestal Building  
1000 Independence Avenue, SW  
Washington, DC 20585

        
                  * Link to facebook
          * Link to twitter
          * Link to youtube
          * Link to linkedin
        

An office of

![Energy.Gov](/sites/all/themes/clean_energy/images/xlogo_footer_white.png.pagespeed.ic.fkN5go8WJN.png)

        
                  * About eere
            * Careers & Internships
            * EERE Home 
            * Publications Library
            * Contact EERE
        
          * Energy.gov Resources
            * Budget & Performance
            * Directives, Delegations & Requirements
            * FOIA
            * Inspector General
            * Privacy Program
            * Small Business
            * Staff & Contractor Resources
          * Federal Government
            * The White House
            * USA.gov
        
          * Web Policies
          * Privacy
          * No Fear Act
          * Whistleblower Protection
          * Information Quality
          * Open Gov
          * Accessibility
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

