

__NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please
upgrade your browser. LEARN MORE »

__Sections __Home __Search

## The New York Times

### Magazine

###### Magazine |The Next Reckoning: Capitalism and Climate Change

__Close search

## Site Search Navigation

Search NYTimes.com

__Clear this text input

Go

https://nyti.ms/2UIRfPb

## Site Navigation

## Site Mobile Navigation

# The Next Reckoning: Capitalism and Climate Change

By NATHANIEL RICH APRIL 9, 2019

Fixing the planet is going to be expensive. Can we stomach the bill for human
survival?

The Climate Issue

        
                  * What Survival Looks Like After the Oceans Rise 
          * Climate Chaos Is Coming — and the Pinkertons Are Ready 
          * How Big Business Is Hedging Against the Apocalypse 
          * The Next Reckoning: Capitalism and Climate Change 
          * The Problem With Putting a Price on the End of the World 
          * Climate Change Could Destroy His Home in Peru. So He Sued an Energy Company in Germany.
        

![](https://static01.nyt.com/newsgraphics/2019/04/09/climate2019/51f6a9588f2c17e118fdd8781dfa8806f5d62a95/caret.svg)

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

In Bangladesh, the effects of climate change are happening now: It may lose
more than 10 percent of its land to sea-level rise within a few decades.
Andrea Frazzetta/Institute, for The New York Times

# The Next Reckoning: Capitalism and Climate Change

Fixing the planet is going to be expensive. Can we stomach the bill for human
survival?

By NATHANIEL RICH APRIL 9, 2019

The world's most difficult problem has a solution so simple that it can be
expressed in four words: Stop burning greenhouse gases. How exactly to pull
this off is somewhat more complicated -- just not as complicated as most
Americans have been led to believe. As James Hansen, the don of modern climate
science, told me last year, "From a technology and economics standpoint, it is
still readily possible to stay under two degrees Celsius." Readily possible.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's report from last October,
which provoked widespread terror, echoed this conclusion. Keeping warming to
1.5 degrees above historical averages was possible, it found, provided we
immediately began to eliminate carbon-dioxide emissions. This was terrifying
only because we have not begun to do any such thing.

Most zero-emissions plans -- "road maps," in bureaucratese, or "pathways," per
the I.P.C.C. -- propose some combination of the following elements: carbon
taxes, effectual international treaties, increased subsidization of renewable
energy, decreased subsidization of fossil fuels, nuclear energy,
reforestation, land-use reform and investments in energy efficiency, energy
storage and carbon-capture technology. But when it comes to drafting actual
laws to achieve these policies, to quote the Heritage Foundation fellow Nick
Loris, "the devil's in the details."

_[See what survival looks like in Bangladesh after the oceans rise.]_

The Heritage Foundation ought to know; for decades, it has demonstrated
mastery of the dark arts of climate-change denialism. This strain of influence
peddling would be harmful enough had it managed merely to deepen the public
ignorance about global warming. But denialism has had devastating downstream
effects (to borrow an industry term). It has managed to defer meaningful
consideration of nearly every urgent policy question that now awaits us, if we
are serious about trying to stop this.

The most fundamental question is whether a capitalistic society is capable of
sharply reducing carbon emissions. Will a radical realignment of our economy
require a radical realignment of our political system -- within the next few
years? Even if the answer is no, we have some decisions to make. How, for
instance, should the proceeds of a carbon tax be directed? Should they be used
to finance clean-energy projects, be paid out directly to taxpayers or accrue
to the national budget? In a healthy democracy, you could expect a rigorous
public debate on this question. But such a debate has rarely surfaced in the
United States because, as of this writing, only a handful of Republican
members of the House of Representatives, out of a caucus of 197, have endorsed
the basic concept of a carbon tax -- an idea that has its roots in
conservative economic thought.

_[Read about how Wall Street is hedging against the apocalypse.]_

And what should be done, if anything, about the people who lose their jobs
once coal plants, whether because of market pressures or federal mandate, are
forced to close? Should unemployed coal miners be retrained as wind farmers,
receive unemployment checks or be abandoned to their plight? You could imagine
a robust political debate about this issue as well -- perhaps with the right
in favor of letting miners fend for themselves and the left supporting a
federal welfare program -- were such questions allowed to be debated.

What should be done for the far greater number of people in poor and neglected
communities, both in the United States and abroad, that stand to suffer most
grievously from a hotter climate in the years ahead? What penalties should
Exxon and the other major oil and gas companies suffer for their sins? What
branch of government should impose those penalties, and should criminal
liability be extended to individual lobbyists and chief executives? Should
old, declining nuclear plants be preserved, and should new, smaller plants be
commissioned, and who ought to make such decisions? How much federal funding
should be invested in researching speculative geoengineering or carbon-capture
technologies? Should insurance rates in coastal regions be increased abruptly
to reflect the actual threat of sea-level rise, or phased in gradually? What
sanctions should be imposed on foreign nations that fail to comply with the
terms of global climate treaties? On these and many other such questions,
reasonable minds might disagree. But beyond the reaches of the scholarly and
activist literature, reasonable minds have not been given the opportunity.

_[Read David Leonhardt on the economics of climate change.]_

It has become commonplace to observe that corporations behave like
psychopaths. They are self-interested to the point of violence, possess a
vibrant disregard for laws and social mores, have an indifference to the
rights of others and fail to feel remorse. A psychopath gains a person's
trust, mimics emotions but feels nothing and passes in public for human (with
a charming Twitter feed, say). The psychopath is calm, calculated, scrupulous
-- never more so than while plotting murder. There can be no reasoning with a
psychopath; neither rational argument nor blandishment has a remote chance of
success. If this indeed is the pathology that we are dealing with when it
comes to the climate impasse, then we should be honest about the appropriate
course of treatment. Coercion must be the remedy -- exerted economically,
politically and morally, preferably all at once. The psychopath respects only
force.

Nathaniel Rich is the author of the new book “Losing Earth: A Recent History,”
based on an article that appeared in this magazine.

## MORE CLIMATE

        
                  * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
        

### What Survival Looks Like After the Oceans Rise

By ANDREA FRAZZETTA

        
                  * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
        

### Climate Chaos Is Coming — and the Pinkertons Are Ready

By NOAH GALLAGHER SHANNON

        
                  * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
        

### How Big Business Is Hedging Against the Apocalypse

By JESSE BARRON

        
                  * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
        

### The Problem With Putting a Price on the End of the World

By DAVID LEONHARDT

        
                  * ![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)
        

### Climate Change Could Destroy His Home in Peru. So He Sued an Energy

Company in Germany.

By BROOKE JARVIS

## More on NYTimes.com

Advertisement

## Site Information Navigation

        
                  * (C) 2019 The New York Times Company
          * Home
          * Search
          * Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you.
          * Contact Us
          * Work With Us
          * Advertise
          * Your Ad Choices
          * Privacy
          * Terms of Service
          * Terms of Sale
        

## Site Information Navigation

        
                  * Site Map
          * Help
          * Site Feedback
          * Subscriptions
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

