

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Climate change denial

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f2/Edit-clear.svg/40px-Edit-

clear.svg.png)

|

This article's **lead section may be too long for the length of the article**.
Please help by moving some material from it into the body of the article.
Please read the layout guide and lead section guidelines to ensure the section
will still be inclusive of all essential details. Please discuss this issue on
the article's talk page. _( May 2019)_

---|--- 

Denial, dismissal, or unwarranted doubt about the scientific consensus on the
rate and extent of global warming

For the book of the same name and topic, see Climate Change Denial: Heads in
the Sand.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e0/Cook_et_al._%282016%29_Studies_consensus.jpg/220px-

Cook_et_al._%282016%29_Studies_consensus.jpg)

The results of seven papers from 2004–2015 assessing the scientific consensus
on man-made global warming, see Surveys of scientists' views on climate change

![File:Former Senator Tom Coburn- Paris Climate Agreement Was 'Poorly

Negotiated'.webm](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9d/Former_Senator_Tom_Coburn-

_Paris_Climate_Agreement_Was_%27Poorly_Negotiated%27.webm/220px--

Former_Senator_Tom_Coburn-

_Paris_Climate_Agreement_Was_%27Poorly_Negotiated%27.webm.jpg)Play media

Former senator Tom Coburn of the United States in 2017 discussing the Paris
agreement and denying the scientific consensus on man-made global warming.
Coburn claimed that sea level rise had been no more than 5 mm in 25 years, and
asserted there was now global cooling. In 2013 he said "I am a global warming
denier. I don't deny that."[1]

**Climate change denial** , or **global warming denial** , is part of the
global warming controversy. It involves denial, dismissal, or unwarranted
doubt that contradicts the scientific opinion on climate change, including the
extent to which it is caused by humans, its impacts on nature and human
society, or the potential of adaptation to global warming by human
actions.[2][3][4] Some deniers endorse the term, while others prefer the term
**climate change skepticism**.[3] Several scientists have noted that
"skepticism" is an inaccurate description for those who deny anthropogenic
global warming.[5][6][7] In effect, the two terms form a continuous,
overlapping range of views, and generally have the same characteristics: both
reject, to a greater or lesser extent, the scientific consensus on climate
change.[8][9] Climate change denial can also be implicit, when individuals or
social groups accept the science but fail to come to terms with it or to
translate their acceptance into action.[10] Several social science studies
have analyzed these positions as forms of denialism[8][9] and
pseudoscience.[11]

The campaign to undermine public trust in climate science has been described
as a "denial machine" organized by industrial, political and ideological
interests, and supported by conservative media and skeptical bloggers to
manufacture uncertainty about global warming.[12][13][14] In the public
debate, phrases such as _climate skepticism_ have frequently been used with
the same meaning as _climate denialism_.[15] The labels are contested: those
actively challenging climate science commonly describe themselves as
"skeptics", but many do not comply with common standards of scientific
skepticism and, regardless of evidence, persistently deny the validity of
human caused global warming.[8]

Although scientific opinion on climate change is that human activity is
extremely likely to be the primary driver of climate change,[16][17] the
politics of global warming have been affected by climate change denial,
hindering efforts to prevent climate change and adapt to the warming
climate.[18][19][20] Those promoting denial commonly use rhetorical tactics to
give the appearance of a scientific controversy where there is none.[21][22]

Of the world's countries, the climate change denial industry is most powerful
in the United States.[23][24] From 2015 to 2017 (after having already served
from 2003 to 2007), the United States Senate Committee on Environment and
Public Works was chaired by oil lobbyist and climate change denier Jim Inhofe,
who had previously called climate change "the greatest hoax ever perpetrated
against the American people" and claimed to have debunked the alleged hoax in
February 2015 when he brought a snowball with him in the Senate chamber and
tossed it across the floor.[25] He was succeeded in 2017 by John Barrasso, who
similarly said: "The climate is constantly changing. The role human activity
plays is not known."[26] Organised campaigning to undermine public trust in
climate science is associated with conservative economic policies and backed
by industrial interests opposed to the regulation of CO  
2 emissions.[27] Climate change denial has been associated with the fossil
fuels lobby, the Koch brothers, industry advocates and conservative think
tanks, often in the United States.[19][28][29][30] More than 90% of papers
sceptical on climate change originate from right-wing think tanks.[31] The
total annual income of these climate change counter-movement-organizations is
roughly $900 million.[32] Between 2002 and 2010, nearly $120 million (£77
million) was anonymously donated via the Donors Trust and Donors Capital Fund
to more than 100 organisations seeking to undermine the public perception of
the science on climate change.[33] In 2013 the Center for Media and Democracy
reported that the State Policy Network (SPN), an umbrella group of 64 U.S.
think tanks, had been lobbying on behalf of major corporations and
conservative donors to oppose climate change regulation.[34]

Since the late 1970s, oil companies have published research broadly in line
with the standard views on global warming. Despite this, oil companies
organized a climate change denial campaign to disseminate public
disinformation for several decades, a strategy that has been compared to the
organized denial of the hazards of tobacco smoking by the tobacco
industry.[35][36][37]

## Contents

        
                  * 1 Terminology
          * 2 History
          * 3 Denial networks
            * 3.1 United States
            * 3.2 International
          * 4 Arguments and positions on global warming
            * 4.1 Conspiracy theories
            * 4.2 Taxonomy of climate change denial
          * 5 Pseudoscience
          * 6 Public opinion
          * 7 Nationalism
          * 8 Lobbying
            * 8.1 Private sector
            * 8.2 Public sector
            * 8.3 Schools
          * 9 Effect
          * 10 See also
          * 11 References
          * 12 Bibliography
          * 13 Further reading
        

## Terminology

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/53/Amardeo_Sarma_lecture_1_EuroSkepCon2015.jpg/260px-

Amardeo_Sarma_lecture_1_EuroSkepCon2015.jpg)

Amardeo Sarma lecturing about climate change denialism and the future world
energy and environmental problems during the European Skeptics Congress 2015

"Climate change skepticism" and "climate change denial" refer to denial,
dismissal or unwarranted doubt of the scientific consensus on the rate and
extent of global warming, its significance, or its connection to human
behavior, in whole or in part.[38][39] Though there is a distinction between
skepticism which indicates doubting the truth of an assertion and outright
denial of the truth of an assertion, in the public debate phrases such as
"climate scepticism" have frequently been used with the same meaning as
climate denialism or contrarianism.[15][40]

The terminology emerged in the 1990s. Even though all scientists adhere to
scientific skepticism as an inherent part of the process, by mid November 1995
the word "skeptic" was being used specifically for the minority who publicized
views contrary to the scientific consensus. This small group of scientists
presented their views in public statements and the media, rather than to the
scientific community.[41][42] This usage continued.[43] In his December 1995
article _The Heat is On: The warming of the world's climate sparks a blaze of
denial_ , Ross Gelbspan said industry had engaged "a small band of skeptics"
to confuse public opinion in a "persistent and well-funded campaign of
denial".[44] His 1997 book _The Heat is On_ may have been the first to
concentrate specifically on the topic.[45] In it, Gelbspan discussed a
"pervasive denial of global warming" in a "persistent campaign of denial and
suppression" involving "undisclosed funding of these 'greenhouse skeptics' "
with "the climate skeptics" confusing the public and influencing decision
makers.[46]

A November 2006 CBC Television documentary on the campaign was titled "The
Denial Machine".[47][48] In 2007 journalist Sharon Begley reported on the
"denial machine",[49] a phrase subsequently used by academics.[13][48]

In addition to _explicit denial_ , social groups have shown _implicit denial_
by accepting the scientific consensus, but failing to come to terms with its
implications or take action to reduce the problem.[10] This was exemplified in
Kari Norgaard's study of a village in Norway affected by climate change, where
residents diverted their attention to other issues.[50]

The terminology is debated: most of those actively rejecting the scientific
consensus use the terms _skeptic_ and _climate change skepticism_ , and only a
few have expressed preference for being described as deniers,[39][6] but the
word "skepticism" is incorrectly used, as scientific skepticism is an
intrinsic part of scientific methodology.[7][51][52] The term _contrarian_ is
more specific, but used less frequently. In academic literature and
journalism, the terms _climate change denial_ and _climate change deniers_
have well established usage as descriptive terms without any pejorative
intent. Both the National Center for Science Education and historian Spencer
R. Weart recognise that either option is problematic, but have decided to use
"climate change denial" rather than "skepticism".[53][54]

Terms related to _denialism_ have been criticised for introducing a moralistic
tone, and potentially implying a link with Holocaust denial.[7][55] There have
been claims that this link is intentional, which academics have strongly
disputed.[56] The usage of "denial" long predates the Holocaust, and is
commonly applied in other areas such as HIV/AIDS denialism: the claim is
described by John Timmer of _Ars Technica_ as itself being a form of
denial.[57]

In December 2014, an open letter from the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry
called on the media to stop using the term "skepticism" when referring to
climate change denial. They contrasted scientific skepticism—which is
"foundational to the scientific method"—with denial—"the a priori rejection of
ideas without objective consideration"—and the behavior of those involved in
political attempts to undermine climate science. They said "Not all
individuals who call themselves climate change skeptics are deniers. But
virtually all deniers have falsely branded themselves as skeptics. By
perpetrating this misnomer, journalists have granted undeserved credibility to
those who reject science and scientific inquiry."[56][58] In June 2015 Media
Matters for America were told by _The New York Times_ Public Editor that the
newspaper was increasingly tending to use "denier" when "someone is
challenging established science", but assessing this on an individual basis
with no fixed policy, and would not use the term when someone was "kind of
wishy-washy on the subject or in the middle." The executive director of the
Society of Environmental Journalists said that while there was reasonable
skepticism about specific issues, she felt that denier was "the most accurate
term when someone claims there is no such thing as global warming, or agrees
that it exists but denies that it has any cause we could understand or any
impact that could be measured."[59]

The Committee for Skeptical Inquiry letter inspired a petition by
climatetruth.org[60] in which signers were asked to 'Tell the Associated
Press: Establish a rule in the AP StyleBook ruling out the use of “skeptic” to
describe those who deny scientific facts.' On September 22, 2015, the
Associated Press announced "An addition to AP Stylebook entry on global
warming" which advised, "To describe those who don’t accept climate science or
dispute the world is warming from man-made forces, use climate change doubters
or those who reject mainstream climate science. Avoid use of skeptics or
deniers."[61][62] On May 17, 2019, The Guardian also rejected use of the term
"climate skeptic" in favor of "climate science denier".[63]

## History

Further information: History of climate change science

Research on the effect of CO  
2 on the climate began in 1824, when Joseph Fourier inferred the existence the
atmospheric "greenhouse effect". In 1860, John Tyndall quantified the effects
of greenhouse gases on absorption of infrared radiation. Svante Arrhenius in
1896 showed that coal burning could cause global warming, and in 1938 Guy
Stewart Callendar found it already happening to some extent.[64][65] Research
advanced rapidly after 1940; from 1957, Roger Revelle alerted the public to
risks that fossil fuel burning was "a grandiose scientific experiment" on
climate.[66][67] NASA and NOAA took on research, the 1979 Charney Report
concluded that substantial warming was already on the way, and "A wait-and-see
policy may mean waiting until it is too late."[68][69]

In 1959 a scientist working for Shell suggested in a New Scientist article,
that carbon cycles are too vast to upset Nature's balance.[70]

In response to increasing public awareness of the greenhouse effect in the
1970s, conservative reaction built up, denying environmental concerns which
could lead to government regulation. With the 1981 Presidency of Ronald
Reagan, global warming became a political issue, with immediate plans to cut
spending on environmental research, particularly climate related, and stop
funding for CO  
2 monitoring. Reagan appointed as Secretary of Energy James B. Edwards, who
said that there was no real global warming problem. Congressman Al Gore had
studied under Revelle and was aware of the developing science: he joined
others in arranging congressional hearings from 1981 onwards, with testimony
by scientists including Revelle, Stephen Schneider and Wallace Smith Broecker.
The hearings gained enough public attention to reduce the cuts in atmospheric
research.[71] A polarized party-political debate developed. In 1982 Sherwood
B. Idso published his book _Carbon Dioxide: Friend or Foe?_ which said
increases in CO  
2 would not warm the planet, but would fertilize crops and were "something to
be encouraged and not suppressed", while complaining that his theories had
been rejected by the "scientific establishment". An Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) report in 1983 said global warming was "not a theoretical problem
but a threat whose effects will be felt within a few years", with potentially
"catastrophic" consequences.[72] The Reagan administration reacted by calling
the report "alarmist", and the dispute got wide news coverage. Public
attention turned to other issues, then the 1985 finding of a polar ozone hole
brought a swift international response. To the public, this was related to
climate change and the possibility of effective action, but news interest
faded.[73]

Public attention was renewed amidst summer droughts and heat waves when James
Hansen testified to a Congressional hearing on 23 June 1988,[74] stating with
high confidence that long term warming was under way with severe warming
likely within the next 50 years, and warning of likely storms and floods.
There was increasing media attention: the scientific community had reached a
broad consensus that the climate was warming, human activity was very likely
the primary cause, and there would be significant consequences if the warming
trend was not curbed.[75] These facts encouraged discussion about new laws
concerning environmental regulation, which was opposed by the fossil fuel
industry.[76]

From 1989 onwards industry funded organisations including the Global Climate
Coalition and the George C. Marshall Institute sought to spread doubt among
the public, in a strategy already developed by the tobacco
industry.[77][78][79] A small group of scientists opposed to the consensus on
global warming became politically involved, and with support from conservative
political interests, began publishing in books and the press rather than in
scientific journals.[80] This small group of scientists included some of the
same people that were part of the strategy already tried by the tobacco
industry.[81] Spencer Weart identifies this period as the point where
legitimate skepticism about basic aspects of climate science was no longer
justified, and those spreading mistrust about these issues became deniers.[82]
As their arguments were increasingly refuted by the scientific community and
new data, deniers turned to political arguments, making personal attacks on
the reputation of scientists, and promoting ideas of a global warming
conspiracy.[83]

With the 1989 fall of communism and the environmental movement's international
reach at the 1992 Rio Earth Summit, the attention of U.S. conservative think
tanks, which had been organised in the 1970s as an intellectual counter-
movement to socialism, turned from the "red scare" to the "green scare" which
they saw as a threat to their aims of private property, free trade market
economies and global capitalism. As a counter-movement, they used
environmental skepticism to promote denial of the reality of problems such as
loss of biodiversity and climate change.[84]

In 1992, an EPA report linked second-hand smoke with lung cancer. The tobacco
industry engaged the APCO Worldwide public relations company, which set out a
strategy of astroturfing campaigns to cast doubt on the science by linking
smoking anxieties with other issues, including global warming, in order to
turn public opinion against calls for government intervention. The campaign
depicted public concerns as "unfounded fears" supposedly based only on "junk
science" in contrast to their "sound science", and operated through front
groups, primarily the Advancement of Sound Science Center (TASSC) and its Junk
Science website, run by Steven Milloy. A tobacco company memo commented "Doubt
is our product since it is the best means of competing with the 'body of fact'
that exists in the mind of the general public. It is also the means of
establishing a controversy." During the 1990s, the tobacco campaign died away,
and TASSC began taking funding from oil companies including Exxon. Its website
became central in distributing "almost every kind of climate-change denial
that has found its way into the popular press."[85]

In the 1990s, the Marshall Institute began campaigning against increased
regulations on environmental issues such as acid rain, ozone depletion,
second-hand smoke, and the dangers of DDT.[78][85][81] In each case their
argument was that the science was too uncertain to justify any government
intervention, a strategy it borrowed from earlier efforts to downplay the
health effects of tobacco in the 1980s.[77][79] This campaign would continue
for the next two decades.[86]

These efforts succeeded in influencing public perception of climate
science.[87] Between 1988 and the 1990s, public discourse shifted from the
science and data of climate change to discussion of politics and surrounding
controversy.[88]

The campaign to spread doubt continued into the 1990s, including an
advertising campaign funded by coal industry advocates intended to "reposition
global warming as theory rather than fact,"[89][90] and a 1998 proposal
written by the American Petroleum Institute intending to recruit scientists to
convince politicians, the media and the public that climate science was too
uncertain to warrant environmental regulation.[91] The proposal included a US$
5,000,000 multi-point strategy to "maximize the impact of scientific views
consistent with ours on Congress, the media and other key audiences", with a
goal of "raising questions about and undercutting the 'prevailing scientific
wisdom'".[92]

In 1998, Gelbspan noted that his fellow journalists accepted that global
warming was occurring, but said they were in "'stage-two' denial of the
climate crisis", unable to accept the feasibility of answers to the
problem.[93] A subsequent book by Milburn and Conrad on _The Politics of
Denial_ described "economic and psychological forces" producing denial of the
consensus on global warming issues.[94]

These efforts by climate change denial groups were recognized as an organized
campaign beginning in the 2000s.[95] The sociologists Riley Dunlap and Aaron
McCright played a significant role in this shift when they published an
article in 2000 exploring the connection between conservative think tanks and
climate change denial.[96] Later work would continue the argument specific
groups were marshalling skepticism against climate change - A study in 2008
from the University of Central Florida analyzed the sources of
"environmentally skeptical" literature published in the United States. The
analysis demonstrated that 92% of the literature was partly or wholly
affiliated with a self-proclaimed conservative think tanks.[97] A later piece
of research from 2015 identified 4,556 individuals with overlapping network
ties to 164 organizations which are responsible for the most efforts to
downplay the threat of climate change in the U.S.[98][99]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3c/Encontro_do_Assessor_de_Seguran%C3%A7a_Nacional_dos_EUA_John_Bolton_com_Presidente_Eleito_do_Brasil_Jair_Bolsonaro_2.jpg/220px-

Encontro_do_Assessor_de_Seguran%C3%A7a_Nacional_dos_EUA_John_Bolton_com_Presidente_Eleito_do_Brasil_Jair_Bolsonaro_2.jpg)

Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro with Donald Trump's National Security
Adviser John Bolton in Rio de Janeiro, 29 November 2018

Gelbspan's _Boiling Point_ , published in 2004, detailed the fossil-fuel
industry's campaign to deny climate change and undermine public confidence in
climate science.[100] In _Newsweek_ 's August 2007 cover story "The Truth
About Denial", Sharon Begley reported that "the denial machine is running at
full throttle", and said that this "well-coordinated, well-funded campaign" by
contrarian scientists, free-market think tanks, and industry had "created a
paralyzing fog of doubt around climate change."[49]

Referencing work of sociologists Robert Antonio and Robert Brulle, Wayne A.
White has written that climate change denial has become the top priority in a
broader agenda against environmental regulation being pursued by
neoliberals.[101] Today, climate change skepticism is most prominently seen in
the United States, where the media disproportionately features views of the
climate change denial community.[102] In addition to the media, the contrarian
movement has also been sustained by the growth of the internet, having gained
some of its support from internet bloggers, talk radio hosts and newspaper
columnists.[103]

_The New York Times_ and others reported in 2015 that oil companies knew that
burning oil and gas could cause climate change and global warming since the
1970s but nonetheless funded deniers for years.[35][36] Dana Nuccitelli wrote
in _The Guardian_ that a small fringe group of climate deniers were no longer
taken seriously at the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference, in an
agreement that "we need to stop delaying and start getting serious about
preventing a climate crisis."[104] However, _The New York Times_ says any
implementation is voluntary and will depend on any future world leaders—and
every Republican candidate in 2016 has questioned or denied the science of
climate change.[105]

Ernesto Araújo, the new Minister of Foreign Affairs appointed by the newly
elected president Brazil's president Jair Bolsonaro has called global warming
a plot by "cultural Marxists"[106] and has eliminated the Climate Change
Division of the ministry.[107]

## Denial networks

### United States

Further information: Climate change policy of the United States

A poll conducted by _The New York Times_ Magazine in 2006 found that only 56%
of Americans believe that average global temperatures have risen even though
scientists think that they have. A majority of Americans also believe that
scientists are still divided on the issue.[108]

A study was conducted to determine whether or not conservative white Americans
were more likely to deny climate change. Researchers from Lyman Briggs College
took samples of conservative white males of different understandings of global
warming and categorized them separately. Categorized into three groups:
conservative white males who claim to understand global warming, conservative
white males who claim not to understand global warming, and other individuals.
It was concluded that many of these conservative white males who self-report
understanding global warming believe that the mass media has over exaggerated
the effects of global warming and climate change and that the effects of it
have never happened. 48.4% of conservative white males who report
understanding global warming very well in the study said that the effects of
global warming will never happen compared to 19% who do not understand it very
well and 7.4% of all other adults. Many people appear to be confused by
climate science however, the study showed that the people who self reported
understanding global warming were most prone to denying.[109]

Another study by Utah State University discusses geographic variation on
climate change opinions at state and local scales in the United States. It was
noted that prior research was found that public climate change policy support
and behavior are significantly influenced by public beliefs, attitudes and
risk perceptions. In addition, to complement previous stated factors, they're
also influenced by knowledge, emotion, ideology, demographics, and personal
experience. Where people live can account for some significance, since some
people live in weather extreme areas, they could be desensitized to the
overall change in climates as well. Surveys were conducted and showed that 63%
of Americans believe that global warming is happening, 47% believe that it is
human caused and 42% believe that most scientists think it is happening. In
the study, a model was constructed to determine the public opinion of climate
change across the nation. Representative telephone based surveys were used to
investigate opinions in four states: California, Texas, Ohio and Colorado in
addition to the Columbus and San Francisco metropolitan areas.[110]

While it had been the case as of 2010 that more than two-thirds of television
weathercasters had denied that warming was real and largely caused by human
activity, as of March 2018 the rate of acceptance among TV forecasters that
the climate is changing has increased to ninety-five percent. The number of
local television stories about global warming has also increased, by fifteen-
fold. Climate Central has received some of the credit for this because they
provide classes for meteorologists and graphics for television stations.[111]

### International

The Clexit Coalition claims to be: "A new international organisation (which)
aims to prevent ratification of the costly and dangerous Paris global warming
treaty".[112] It has members in 26 countries.[113] According to The Guardian
newspaper: "Clexit leaders are heavily involved in tobacco and fossil fuel-
funded organizations".[114]

## Arguments and positions on global warming

Some climate change denial groups say that because CO  
2 is only a trace gas in the atmosphere (roughly 400ppm, or 0.04%) it can only
have a minor effect on the climate. Scientists have known for over a century
that even this small proportion has a significant warming effect, and doubling
the proportion leads to a large temperature increase.[115] The scientific
consensus, as summarized by the IPCC's fourth assessment report, the U.S.
Geological Survey, and other reports, is that human activity is the leading
cause of climate change. The burning of fossil fuels accounts for around 30
billion tons of CO  
2 each year, which is 130 times the amount produced by volcanoes.[116] Some
groups allege that water vapor is a more significant greenhouse gas, and is
left out of many climate models.[115] While water vapor is a greenhouse gas,
the very short atmospheric lifetime of water vapor (about 10 days) compared
that of CO  
2 (hundreds of years) means that CO  
2 is the primary driver of increasing temperatures; water vapour acts as a
feedback, not a forcing.[117] Water vapor has been incorporated into climate
models since their inception in the late 1800s.[118]

Climate denial groups may also argue that global warming stopped recently, a
global warming hiatus, or that global temperatures are actually decreasing,
leading to global cooling. These arguments are based on short term
fluctuations, and ignore the long term pattern of warming.[119]

These groups often point to natural variability, such as sunspots and cosmic
rays, to explain the warming trend.[120] According to these groups, there is
natural variability that will abate over time, and human influences have
little to do with it. These factors are already taken into account when
developing climate models, and the scientific consensus is that they cannot
explain the observed warming trend.[121]

At a May 2018 meeting of the United States House Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, Alabama's Representative Mo Brooks claimed that sea level rise
is caused not by melting glaciers but rather by coastal erosion and silt that
flows from rivers into the ocean.[122]

Climate change denial literature often features the suggestion that we should
wait for better technologies before addressing climate change, when they will
be more affordable and effective.[123]

### Conspiracy theories

Main article: Global warming conspiracy theory

Global warming conspiracy theories have been posited which allege that the
scientific consensus is illusory, or that climatologists are acting on their
own financial interests by causing undue alarm about a changing
climate.[124][125][126] Despite leaked emails during the Climatic Research
Unit email controversy, as well as multinational, independent research on the
topic, no evidence of such a conspiracy has been presented, and strong
consensus exists among scientists from a multitude of political, social,
organizational and national backgrounds about the extent and cause of climate
change.[127][128] Several researchers have concluded that around 97% of
climate scientists agree with this consensus.[129] As well, much of the data
used in climate science is publicly available to be viewed and interpreted by
competing researchers as well as the public.[130]

In 2012, research by Stephan Lewandowsky (then of the University of Western
Australia) concluded that belief in other conspiracy theories, such as that
the FBI was responsible for the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr., was
associated with being more likely to endorse climate change denial.[131]

### Taxonomy of climate change denial

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d8/5_characteristics_of_science_denial.svg/220px-5_characteristics_of_science_denial.svg.png)

Characteristics of science denial (including climate science denial)

In 2004 Stefan Rahmstorf described how the media give the misleading
impression that climate change was still disputed within the scientific
community, attributing this impression to PR efforts of climate change
skeptics. He identified different positions argued by climate skeptics, which
he used as a taxonomy of climate change skepticism:[132] Later the model was
also applied on denial.[5]

> >           1. Trend sceptics/deniers (who deny there is global warming),
[and]

>  
>

> argue that no significant climate warming is taking place at all, claiming
that the warming trend measured by weather stations is an artefact due to
urbanisation around those stations ("urban heat island effect").

>  
>         >           2. Attribution sceptics/deniers (who accept the global
warming trend

>  
>

> but see natural causes for this), [and] doubt that human activities are
responsible for the observed trends. A few of them even deny that the rise in
the atmospheric CO  
>  2 content is anthropogenic [while others argue that] additional CO  
>  2 does not lead to discernible warming [and] that there must be
other—natural—causes for warming.

>  
>         >           3. Impact sceptics/deniers (who think global warming is
harmless or

>  
>

> even beneficial).

>

> — [5][132]

This taxonomy has been used in social science for analysis of publications,
and to categorize climate change skepticism and climate change
denial.[133][134] Sometimes, a fourth category called "consensus denial" is
added, which describes people who question the scientific consensus on
anthropogenic global warming.[5]

The National Center for Science Education describes climate change denial as
disputing differing points in the scientific consensus, a sequential range of
arguments from denying the occurrence of climate change, accepting that but
denying any significant human contribution, accepting these but denying
scientific findings on how this would affect nature and human society, to
accepting all these but denying that humans can mitigate or reduce the
problems.[2] James L. Powell provides a more extended list,[4] as does
climatologist Michael E. Mann in "six stages of denial", a ladder in which
deniers have over time conceded acceptance of points, while retreating to a
position which still rejects the mainstream consensus:[135]

> >           1. CO

>  
>

> 2 is not actually increasing.

>  
>         >           2. Even if it is, the increase has no impact on the
climate since

>  
>

> there is no convincing evidence of warming.

>  
>         >           3. Even if there is warming, it is due to natural
causes.

>  
>           4. Even if the warming cannot be explained by natural causes, the

>  
>

> human impact is small, and the impact of continued greenhouse gas emissions
will be minor.

>  
>         >           5. Even if the current and future projected human
effects on Earth's

>  
>

> climate are not negligible, the changes are generally going to be good for
us.

>  
>         >           6. Whether or not the changes are going to be good for
us, humans are

>  
>

> very adept at adapting to changes; besides, it's too late to do anything
about it, and/or a technological fix is bound to come along when we really
need it.[135]

Journalists and newspaper columnists including George Monbiot[136][137][138]
and Ellen Goodman,[137] among others,[139][140] have described climate change
denial as a form of denialism.[141]

Denialism in this context has been defined by Chris and Mark Hoofnagle as the
use of rhetorical devices "to give the appearance of legitimate debate where
there is none, an approach that has the ultimate goal of rejecting a
proposition on which a scientific consensus exists." This process
characteristically uses one or more of the following tactics:[22][142][143]

        
                  1. Allegations that scientific consensus involves conspiring to fake data or suppress the truth: a global warming conspiracy theory.
          2. Fake experts, or individuals with views at odds with established knowledge, at the same time marginalising or denigrating published topic experts. Like the manufactured doubt over smoking and health, a few contrarian scientists oppose the climate consensus, some of them the same individuals.
          3. Selectivity, such as cherry picking atypical or even obsolete papers, in the same way that the MMR vaccine controversy was based on one paper: examples include discredited ideas of the medieval warm period.[143]
          4. Unworkable demands of research, claiming that any uncertainty invalidates the field or exaggerating uncertainty while rejecting probabilities and mathematical models.
          5. Logical fallacies.
        

In 2015, environmentalist Bill McKibben accused President Obama (widely
regarded as strongly in favour of action on climate change[144]) of
"Catastrophic Climate-Change Denial", for his approval of oil-drilling permits
in offshore Alaska. According to McKibben, the President has also "opened huge
swaths of the Powder River basin to new coal mining." McKibben calls this
"climate denial of the status quo sort", where the President denies "the
meaning of the science, which is that we must keep carbon in the ground."
[145]

## Pseudoscience

Various groups, including the National Center for Science Education, have
described climate change denial as a form of pseudoscience.[146][147][148]
Climate change skepticism, while in some cases professing to do research on
climate change, has focused instead on influencing the opinion of the public,
legislators and the media, in contrast to legitimate science.[149]

In a review of the book _The Pseudoscience Wars: Immanuel Velikovsky and the
Birth of the Modern Fringe_ by Michael D. Gordin, David Morrison wrote:

> In his final chapter, Gordin turns to the new phase of pseudoscience,
practiced by a few rogue scientists themselves. Climate change denialism is
the prime example, where a handful of scientists, allied with an effective PR
machine, are publicly challenging the scientific consensus that global warming
is real and is due primarily to human consumption of fossil fuels. Scientists
have watched in disbelief that as the evidence for global warming has become
ever more solid, the deniers have been increasingly successful in the public
and political arena. … Today pseudoscience is still with us, and is as
dangerous a challenge to science as it ever was in the past.[150]

## Public opinion

Main article: Public opinion on climate change

Public opinion on climate change is significantly impacted by media coverage
of climate change, and the effects of climate change denial campaigns.
Campaigns to undermine public confidence in climate science have decreased
public belief in climate change, which in turn have impacted legislative
efforts to curb CO  
2 emissions.[151]

The popular media in the U.S. gives greater attention to climate change
skeptics than the scientific community as a whole, and the level of agreement
within the scientific community has not been accurately
communicated.[152][153][154] In some cases, news outlets have allowed climate
change skeptics to explain the science of climate change instead of experts in
climatology.[155] US and UK media coverage differ from that presented in other
countries, where reporting is more consistent with the scientific
literature.[156][157] Some journalists attribute the difference to climate
change denial being propagated, mainly in the US, by business-centered
organizations employing tactics worked out previously by the US tobacco
lobby.[77][158][159] In France, the US and the UK, the opinions of climate
change skeptics appear much more frequently in conservative news outlets than
other news, and in many cases those opinions are left uncontested.[160]

The efforts of Al Gore and other environmental campaigns have focused on the
effects of global warming and have managed to increase awareness and concern,
but despite these efforts, the number of Americans believing humans are the
cause of global warming was holding steady at 61% in 2007, and those believing
the popular media was understating the issue remained about 35%.[161] A recent
poll from 2015 suggests that while Americans are growing more aware of the
dangers and implications of climate change for future generations, the
majority are not worried about it.[162] From a survey conducted in 2004, it
was found that more than 30% of news presented in the previous decade showed
equal attention to both human and non human contributions to global
warming.[163]

A study assessed the public perception and actions to climate change, on
grounds of belief systems, and identified seven psychological barriers
affecting the behavior that otherwise would facilitate mitigation, adaptation,
and environmental stewardship. The author found the following barriers:
cognition, ideological world views, comparisons to key people, costs and
momentum, discredence toward experts and authorities, perceived risks of
change, and inadequate behavioral changes.[164]

## Nationalism

It has been suggested that climate change can conflict with a nationalistic
view because it is "unsolvable" at the national level and requires collective
action between nations or between local communities, and that therefore
populist nationalism tends to reject the science of climate change.[165]

In a TED talk Yuval Noah Harari notes:[166]

> ...nationalism has no solution to climate change. If you want to be a
nationalist in the 21st century, you have to deny the problem. If you accept
the reality of the problem, then you must accept that, yes, there is still
room in the world for patriotism, there is still room in the world for having
special loyalties and obligations towards your own people, towards your own
country. I don't think anybody is really thinking of abolishing that. But in
order to confront climate change, we need additional loyalties and commitments
to a level beyond the nation.

On the other hand, it has been argued that effective climate action is
polycentric rather than international, and national interest in multilateral
groups can be furthered by overcoming climate change denial.[167] Climate
change contrarians may believe in a "caricature" of internationalist state
intervention that is perceived as threatening national sovereignty, and may
re-attribute risks such as flooding to international institutions.[168] UK
Independence Party policy on climate change has been influenced by noted
contrarian Christopher Monckton and then by its energy spokesman Roger Helmer
MEP who stated in a speech "It is not clear that the rise in atmospheric CO2
is anthropogenic".[169]

## Lobbying

Efforts to lobby against environmental regulation have included campaigns to
manufacture doubt about the science behind climate change, and to obscure the
scientific consensus and data.[170] These efforts have undermined public
confidence in climate science, and impacted climate change lobbying.[19][151]

The political advocacy organizations FreedomWorks and Americans for
Prosperity, funded by brothers David and Charles Koch of Koch Industries, were
important in supporting the Tea Party movement and in encouraging the movement
to focus on climate change.[171] Other conservative organizations such as the
Heritage Foundation, Marshall Institute, Cato Institute and the American
Enterprise Institute were significant participants in these lobbying attempts,
seeking to halt or eliminate environmental regulations.[172]

This approach to downplay the significance of climate change was copied from
tobacco lobbyists; in the face of scientific evidence linking tobacco to lung
cancer, to prevent or delay the introduction of regulation. Lobbyists
attempted to discredit the scientific research by creating doubt and
manipulating debate. They worked to discredit the scientists involved, to
dispute their findings, and to create and maintain an apparent controversy by
promoting claims that contradicted scientific research. ""Doubt is our
product," boasted a now infamous 1969 industry memo. Doubt would shield the
tobacco industry from litigation and regulation for decades to come."[173] In
2006, George Monbiot wrote in _The Guardian_ about similarities between the
methods of groups funded by Exxon, and those of the tobacco giant Philip
Morris, including direct attacks on peer-reviewed science, and attempts to
create public controversy and doubt.[136]

Former National Academy of Sciences president Frederick Seitz, who, according
to an article by Mark Hertsgaard in _Vanity Fair_ , earned about US$585,000 in
the 1970s and 1980s as a consultant to R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company,[174]
went on to chair groups such as the Science and Environmental Policy Project
and the George C. Marshall Institute alleged to have made efforts to
"downplay" global warming. Seitz stated in the 1980s that "Global warming is
far more a matter of politics than of climate." Seitz authored the Oregon
Petition, a document published jointly by the Marshall Institute and Oregon
Institute of Science and Medicine in opposition to the Kyoto protocol. The
petition and accompanying "Research Review of Global Warming Evidence"
claimed:

> The proposed limits on greenhouse gases would harm the environment, hinder
the advance of science and technology, and damage the health and welfare of
mankind. There is no convincing scientific evidence that human release of
carbon dioxide, methane, or other greenhouse gases is causing or will, in the
foreseeable future, cause catastrophic heating of the Earth's atmosphere and
disruption of the Earth's climate. … We are living in an increasingly lush
environment of plants and animals as a result of the carbon dioxide increase.
Our children will enjoy an Earth with far more plant and animal life than that
with which we now are blessed. This is a wonderful and unexpected gift from
the Industrial Revolution.[136]

George Monbiot wrote in _The Guardian_ that this petition, which he criticizes
as misleading and tied to industry funding, "has been cited by almost every
journalist who claims that climate change is a myth." Efforts by climate
change denial groups played a significant role in the eventual rejection of
the Kyoto protocol in the US.[175]

Monbiot has written about another group founded by the tobacco lobby, The
Advancement of Sound Science Coalition (TASSC), that now campaigns against
measures to combat global warming. In again trying to manufacture the
appearance of a grass-roots movement against "unfounded fear" and "over-
regulation," Monbiot states that TASSC "has done more damage to the campaign
to halt [climate change] than any other body."[136]

Drexel University environmental sociologist Robert Brulle analysed the funding
of 91 organizations opposed to restrictions on carbon emissions, which he
termed the "climate change counter-movement." Between 2003 and 2013, the
donor-advised funds Donors Trust and Donors Capital Fund, combined, were the
largest funders, accounting for about one quarter of the total funds, and the
American Enterprise Institute was the largest recipient, 16% of the total
funds. The study also found that the amount of money donated to these
organizations by means of foundations whose funding sources cannot be traced
had risen.[176][177][178][179][180]

### Private sector

See also: Business action on climate change and ExxonMobil climate change
controversy

Several large corporations within the fossil fuel industry provide significant
funding for attempts to mislead the public about the trustworthiness of
climate science.[181] ExxonMobil and the Koch family foundations have been
identified as especially influential funders of climate change
contrarianism.[182] The bankruptcy of the coal company Cloud Peak Energy
revealed it funded the Institute for Energy Research, a climate denial think
tank, as well as several other policy influencers.[183][184]

After the IPCC released its February 2007 report, the American Enterprise
Institute offered British, American and other scientists $10,000 plus travel
expenses to publish articles critical of the assessment. The institute had
received more than US$1.6 million from Exxon, and its vice-chairman of
trustees was former head of Exxon Lee Raymond. Raymond sent letters that
alleged the IPCC report was not "supported by the analytical work." More than
20 AEI employees worked as consultants to the George W. Bush
administration.[185] Despite her initial conviction that climate change denial
would abate with time, Senator Barbara Boxer said that when she learned of the
AEI's offer, she "realized there was a movement behind this that just wasn't
giving up."[186]

The Royal Society conducted a survey that found ExxonMobil had given US$2.9
million to American groups that "misinformed the public about climate change,"
39 of which "misrepresented the science of climate change by outright denial
of the evidence".[187][188] In 2006, the Royal Society issued a demand that
ExxonMobil withdraw funding for climate change denial. The letter drew
criticism, notably from Timothy Ball who argued the society attempted to
"politicize the private funding of science and to censor scientific
debate."[189]

ExxonMobil denied that it has been trying to mislead the public about global
warming. A spokesman, Gantt Walton, said that ExxonMobil's funding of research
does not mean that it acts to influence the research, and that ExxonMobil
supports taking action to curb the output of greenhouse gasses.[190] Research
conducted at an Exxon archival collection at the University of Texas and
interviews with former employees by journalists indicate the scientific
opinion within the company and their public posture towards climate change was
contradictory.[191]

Between 1989 and 2002 the Global Climate Coalition, a group of mainly United
States businesses, used aggressive lobbying and public relations tactics to
oppose action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and fight the Kyoto Protocol.
The coalition was financed by large corporations and trade groups from the
oil, coal and auto industries. _The New York Times_ reported that "even as the
coalition worked to sway opinion [towards skepticism], its own scientific and
technical experts were advising that the science backing the role of
greenhouse gases in global warming could not be refuted."[192] In 2000, Ford
Motor Company was the first company to leave the coalition as a result of
pressure from environmentalists,[193] followed by Daimler-Chrysler, Texaco,
the Southern Company and General Motors subsequently left to GCC.[194] The
organization closed in 2002.

From January 2009 through June 2010, the oil, coal and utility industries
spent $500 million in lobby expenditures in opposition to legislation to
address climate change.[195][196]

In early 2015, several media reports emerged saying that Willie Soon, a
popular scientist among climate change deniers, had failed to disclose
conflicts of interest in at least 11 scientific papers published since
2008.[197] They reported that he received a total of $1.25m from ExxonMobil,
Southern Company, the American Petroleum Institute and a foundation run by the
Koch brothers.[198] Charles R. Alcock, director of the Harvard–Smithsonian
Center for Astrophysics, where Soon was based, said that allowing funders of
Soon's work to prohibit disclosure of funding sources was a mistake, which
will not be permitted in future grant agreements.[199]

### Public sector

The Republican Party in the United States is unique in denying anthropogenic
climate change among conservative political parties across the Western
world.[200][201] In 1994, according to a leaked memo, the Republican
strategist Frank Luntz advised members of the Republican Party, with regard to
climate change, that "you need to continue to make the lack of scientific
certainty a primary issue" and "challenge the science" by "recruiting experts
who are sympathetic to your view."[186] (In 2006, Luntz said he still believes
"back [in] '97, '98, the science was uncertain", but he now agrees with the
scientific consensus.)[202] From 2008 to 2017, the Republican Party went from
"debating how to combat human-caused climate change to arguing that it does
not exist," according to _The New York Times_.[203] In 2011 "more than half of
the Republicans in the House and three-quarters of Republican senators" said
"that the threat of global warming, as a man-made and highly threatening
phenomenon, is at best an exaggeration and at worst an utter "hoax"" according
to Judith Warner writing in _The New York Times Magazine_.[204] In 2014, more
than 55% of congressional Republicans were climate change deniers, according
to NBC News.[205][206] According to PolitiFact in May 2014, Jerry Brown's
statement that 'virtually no Republican' in Washington accepts climate change
science, was "mostly true"; PolitiFact counted "eight out of 278, or about 3
percent" of Republican members of Congress who "accept the prevailing
scientific conclusion that global warming is both real and man-
made."[207][208]

In 2005, _The New York Times_ reported that Philip Cooney, former fossil fuel
lobbyist and "climate team leader" at the American Petroleum Institute and
President George W. Bush's chief of staff of the Council on Environmental
Quality, had "repeatedly edited government climate reports in ways that play
down links between such emissions and global warming, according to internal
documents."[209] Sharon Begley reported in _Newsweek_ that Cooney "edited a
2002 report on climate science by sprinkling it with phrases such as 'lack of
understanding' and 'considerable uncertainty.'" Cooney reportedly removed an
entire section on climate in one report, whereupon another lobbyist sent him a
fax saying "You are doing a great job."[186] Cooney announced his resignation
two days after the story of his tampering with scientific reports broke,[210]
but a few days later it was announced that Cooney would take up a position
with ExxonMobil.[211]

United States Secretary of Energy Rick Perry, in a 19 June 2017 interview with
CNBC, acknowledged the existence of climate change and impact from humans, but
said that he did not agree with the idea that carbon dioxide was the primary
driver of global warming pointing instead to "the ocean waters and this
environment that we live in".[212] The American Meteorological Society
responded in a letter to Perry saying that it is "critically important that
you understand that emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are
the primary cause", pointing to conclusions of scientists worldwide.[213]

Republican Jim Bridenstine, the first elected politician to serve as NASA
administrator, had previously stated that global temperatures were not rising.
A month after the Senate confirmed his NASA position in April 2018, he
acknowledged that human emissions of greenhouse gases are raising global
temperatures.[214]

### Schools

According to documents leaked in February 2012, The Heartland Institute is
developing a curriculum for use in schools which frames climate change as a
scientific controversy.[215][216][217] In 2017, Glenn Branch, Deputy Director
of the National Center for Science Education (NCSE), wrote that "the Heartland
Institute is continuing to inflict its climate change denial literature on
science teachers across the country". He also described how some science
teachers were reacting to Heartland's mailings: "Fortunately, the Heartland
mailing continues to be greeted with skepticism and dismissed with
scorn."[218] The NCSE has prepared Classroom Resources in response to
Heartland and other anti-science threats.[219]

Branch also referred to an article by ClimateFeedback.org[218] which reviewed
an unsolicited Heartland booklet, entitled "Why Scientists Disagree about
Global Warming", which was sent to science teachers in the United States.
Their intention was to send it to "more than 200,000 K-12 teachers". Each
significant claim was rated for accuracy by scientists who were experts on
that topic. Overall, they scored the accuracy of the booklet with an "F": "it
could hardly score lower", and "the "Key Findings" section are incorrect,
misleading, based on flawed logic, or simply factually inaccurate."[220]

## Effect

Manufactured uncertainty over climate change, the fundamental strategy of
climate change denial, has been very effective, particularly in the US. It has
contributed to low levels of public concern and to government inaction
worldwide.[20][221] An Angus Reid poll released in 2010 indicates that global
warming skepticism in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom has
been rising.[222][223] There may be multiple causes of this trend, including a
focus on economic rather than environmental issues, and a negative perception
of the United Nations and its role in discussing climate change.[224]

Another cause may be weariness from overexposure to the topic: secondary polls
suggest that the public may have been discouraged by extremism when discussing
the topic,[222] while other polls show 54% of U.S. voters believe that "the
news media make global warming appear worse than it really is."[225] A poll in
2009 regarding the issue of whether "some scientists have falsified research
data to support their own theories and beliefs about global warming" showed
that 59% of Americans believed it "at least somewhat likely", with 35%
believing it was "very likely".[224]

According to Tim Wirth, "They patterned what they did after the tobacco
industry. […] Both figured, sow enough doubt, call the science uncertain and
in dispute. That's had a huge impact on both the public and Congress."[77]
This approach has been propagated by the US media, presenting a false balance
between climate science and climate skeptics.[226] _Newsweek_ reports that the
majority of Europe and Japan accept the consensus on scientific climate
change, but only one third of Americans considered human activity to play a
major role in climate change in 2006; 64% believed that scientists disagreed
about it "a lot."[227] A 2007 _Newsweek_ poll found these numbers were
declining, although majorities of Americans still believed that scientists
were uncertain about climate change and its causes.[228] Rush Holt wrote a
piece for _Science_ , which appeared in _Newsweek_ :

> … for more than two decades scientists have been issuing warnings that the
release of greenhouse gases, principally carbon dioxide (CO  
>  2), is probably altering Earth's climate in ways that will be expensive and
even deadly. The American public yawned and bought bigger cars. Statements by
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, American Geophysical
Union, American Meteorological Society, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, and others underscored the warnings and called for new government
policies to deal with climate change. Politicians, presented with noisy
statistics, shrugged, said there is too much doubt among scientists, and did
nothing.[229]

Deliberate attempts by the Western Fuels Association "to confuse the public"
have succeeded in their objectives. This has been "exacerbated by media
treatment of the climate issue". According to a Pew poll in 2012, 57% of the
US public are unaware of, or outright reject, the scientific consensus on
climate change.[230] Some organizations promoting climate change denial have
asserted that scientists are increasingly rejecting climate change, but this
notion is contradicted by research showing that 97% of published papers
endorse the scientific consensus, and that percentage is increasing with
time.[230]

Social psychologist Craig Foster compares climate change denialists to flat-
earth believers and the reaction to the latter by the scientific community.
Foster states, "the potential and kinetic energy devoted to counter the flat-
earth movement is wasteful and misguided... I don't understand why anybody
would worry about the flat-earth gnat while facing the climate change
mammoth... Climate change denial does not require belief. It only requires
neglect."[231]

In 2016, Aaron McCright argued that anti-environmentalism—and climate change
denial specifically—has expanded to a point in the US where it has now become
"a central tenet of the current conservative and Republican identity."[232]

On the other hand, global oil companies have begun to acknowledge the
existence of climate change and its risks.[233]

Manufactured climate change denial is also influencing how scientific
knowledge is communicated to the public. According to climate scientist
Michael E. Mann, "...universities and scientific societies and organizations,
publishers, etc.—are too often risk averse when it comes to defending and
communicating science that is perceived as threatening by powerful
interests..."[234]

## See also

        
                  * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8c/Global_Warming_Map.jpg/32px-Global_Warming_Map.jpg)Global warming portal
        

![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a8/Office-

book.svg/30px-Office-book.svg.png) |

        
                  * Book: Global warming denial
        

---|---  
* Agnotology * Environmental skepticism * Anti-environmentalism * Climate alarmist * Effects of global warming * Information Council on the Environment * International Conference on Climate Change * Motivated reasoning * Renewable energy commercialization: Non-technical barriers to acceptance * Semmelweis reflex * List of scientists opposing the mainstream scientific assessment of global warming * Political positions of Donald Trump: Climate change and pollution * Films: * _Climate Change Denial Disorder_ , satirical parody film about a fictional disease * _Before the Flood_ , documenting climate change denial and lobbying processes

## References

        
                  1. **^** Brown, Alex (27 August 2013). "Tom Coburn Labels Himself a "Global Warming Denier"". _The Atlantic_. Retrieved  23 October 2017. citing TulsaWorld [archived article]
          2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ National Center for Science Education 2010: "The first pillar of climate change denial—that climate change is bad science—attacks various aspects of the scientific consensus about climate change … there are climate change deniers: 
            * who deny that significant climate change is occurring
            * who … deny that human activity is significantly responsible
            * who … deny the scientific evidence about its significant effects on the world and our society …
            * who … deny that humans can take significant actions to reduce or mitigate its impact.
        

Of these varieties of climate change denial, the most visible are the first
and the second."

        
                  3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Why Is It Called Denial?". National Center for Science Education. 15 January 2016. Retrieved  21 January 2016.
          4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Powell 2012, pp. 170–173: "Anatomy of Denial—Global warming deniers…. throw up a succession of claims, and fall back from one line of defense to the next as scientists refute each one in turn. Then they start over:
        

'The earth is not warming.'  
'All right, it is warming but the Sun is the cause.'  
'Well then, humans are the cause, but it doesn't matter, because it warming
will do no harm. More carbon dioxide will actually be beneficial. More crops
will grow.'  
'Admittedly, global warming could turn out to be harmful, but we can do
nothing about it.'  
'Sure, we could do something about global warming, but the cost would be too
great. We have more pressing problems here and now, like AIDS and poverty.'  
'We might be able to afford to do something to address global warming some-
day, but we need to wait for sound science, new technologies, and
geoengineering.'  
'The earth is not warming. Global warming ended in 1998; it was never a
crisis.'

        
                  5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Björnberg, Karin Edvardsson; et al. (2017). "Climate and environmental science denial: A review of the scientific literature published in 1990-2015". _Journal of Cleaner Production_. **167** : 229–241. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.066.
          6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Washington 2013, p. 2: "Many climate change deniers call themselves climate 'skeptics'…However, refusing to accept the overwhelming 'preponderance of evidence' is not skepticism, it is _denial_ and should be called by its true name… The use of the term 'climate skeptic' is a distortion of reality…Skepticism is healthy in both science and society; denial is not."
          7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ O'Neill, Saffron J.; sjoneill@unimelb.edu.au; Boykoff, Max (28 September 2010). "Climate denier, skeptic, or contrarian?". _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_. **107** (39): E151. Bibcode:2010PNAS..107E.151O. doi:10.1073/pnas.1010507107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2947866. PMID 20807754. " Using the language of denialism brings a moralistic tone into the climate change debate that we would do well to avoid. Further, labeling views as denialist has the potential to inappropriately link such views with Holocaust denial… However, skepticism forms an integral part of the scientific method, and, thus, the term is frequently misapplied in such phrases as "climate change skeptic.""
          8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Dunlap 2013, pp. 691–698: "There is debate over which term is most appropriate… Those involved in challenging climate science label themselves "skeptics"… Yet skepticism is…a common characteristic of scientists, making it inappropriate to allow those who deny AGW to don the mantle of skeptics…It seems best to think of skepticism-denial as a continuum, with some individuals (and interest groups) holding a skeptical view of AGW…and others in complete denial"
          9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Timmer 2014
          10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ National Center for Science Education 2012: "Climate change denial is most conspicuous when it is explicit, as it is in controversies over climate education. The idea of implicit (or "implicatory") denial, however, is increasingly discussed among those who study the controversies over climate change. Implicit denial occurs when people who accept the scientific community's consensus on the answers to the central questions of climate change on the intellectual level fail to come to terms with it or to translate their acceptance into action. Such people are in denial, so to speak, about climate change."
          11. **^** Sven Ove Hansson: _Science denial as a form of pseudoscience_. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 63, (2017), 39-47, doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2017.05.002.
          12. **^** Vaidyanathan 2014.
          13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dunlap 2013, pp. 691–698: "From the outset, there has been an organized "disinformation" campaign… to "manufacture uncertainty" over AGW … especially by attacking climate science and scientists … waged by a loose coalition of industrial (especially fossil fuels) interests and conservative foundations and think tanks … often assisted by a small number of 'contrarian scientists. … greatly aided by conservative media and politicians … and more recently by a bevy of skeptical bloggers. This 'denial machine' has played a crucial role in generating skepticism toward AGW among laypeople and policy makers "
          14. **^** Begley 2007: "ICE and the Global Climate Coalition lobbied hard against a global treaty to curb greenhouse gases, and were joined by a central cog in the denial machine: the George C. Marshall Institute, a conservative think tank. .... the denial machine—think tanks linking up with like-minded, contrarian researchers"
          15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Nerlich 2010, pp. 419, 437: "Climate scepticism in the sense of climate denialism or contrarianism is not a new phenomenon, but it has recently been very much in the media spotlight. …. Such disagreements are not new but the emails provided climate sceptics, in the sense of deniers or contrarians, with a golden opportunity to mount a sustained effort aimed at demonstrating the legitimacy of their views. This allowed them to question climate science and climate policies based on it and to promote political inaction and inertia. …. footnote 1. I shall use "climate sceptics" here in the sense of "climate deniers", although there are obvious differences between scepticism and denial (see Shermer, 2010; Kemp, et al., 2010). However, "climate sceptic" and "climate scepticism" were commonly used during the "climategate" debate as meaning "climate denier"."
          16. **^** Oreskes, Naomi (2007). "The Scientific Consensus on Climate Change: How Do We Know We're Not Wrong?". In DiMento, Joseph F. C.; Doughman, Pamela M. (eds.). _Climate Change: What It Means for Us, Our Children, and Our Grandchildren_. The MIT Press. pp. 65–66. ISBN 978-0-262-54193-0.
          17. **^** "Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Summary for Policymakers" (PDF). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Retrieved 22 September 2017. "The evidence for human influence on the climate system has grown since the Fourth Assessment Report (AR4). It is extremely likely that more than half of the observed increase in global average surface temperature from 1951 to 2010 was caused by the anthropogenic increase in greenhouse gas concentrations and other anthropogenic forcings together"
          18. **^** Dunlap 2013: "Even though climate science has now firmly established that global warming is occurring, that human activities contribute to this warming… a significant portion of the American public remains ambivalent or unconcerned, and many policymakers (especially in the United States) deny the necessity of taking steps to reduce carbon emissions…From the outset, there has been an organized "disinformation" campaign… to generate skepticism and denial concerning AGW."
          19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Jacques, Dunlap & Freeman 2008, p. 351: "Conservative think tanks…and their backers launched a full-scale counter-movement… We suggest that this counter-movement has been central to the reversal of US support for environmental protection, both domestically and internationally. Its major tactic has been disputing the seriousness of environmental problems and undermining environmental science by promoting what we term 'environmental scepticism.'"
          20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Painter & Ashe 2012: "Despite a high degree of consensus amongst publishing climate researchers that global warming is occurring, and that it is anthropogenic, this discourse, promoted largely by non-scientists, has had a significant impact on public perceptions of the issue, fostering the impression that elite opinion is divided as to the nature and extent of the threat."
          21. **^** Hoofnagle, Mark (30 April 2007). "Hello Science blogs (Welcome to Denialism blog)"."Denialism is the employment of rhetorical tactics to give the appearance of argument or legitimate debate, when in actuality there is none. These false arguments are used when one has few or no facts to support one's viewpoint against a scientific consensus or against overwhelming evidence to the contrary. They are effective in distracting from actual useful debate using emotionally appealing, but ultimately empty and illogical assertions. Examples of common topics in which denialists employ their tactics include: Creationism/Intelligent Design, Global Warming denialism …" and "5 general tactics are used by denialists to sow confusion. They are conspiracy, selectivity (cherry-picking), fake experts, impossible expectations (also known as moving goalposts), and general fallacies of logic."
          22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Diethelm & McKee 2009
          23. **^** Readfearn, Graham (5 March 2015). "Doubt over climate science is a product with an industry behind it". _The Guardian_.
          24. **^** Washington, Haydn; Cook, John (2011). _Climate Change Denial: Heads in the Sand_. Earthscan. p. 108. ISBN 978-1-84971-335-1.
          25. **^** Suzanne Goldenberg (11 June 2015). "Republicans' leading climate denier tells the pope to butt out of climate debate". _The Guardian_.
          26. **^** Republican leader: Climate change science 'not known', _The Hill_
          27. **^** Klein, Naomi (9 November 2011). "Capitalism vs. the Climate". _The Nation_. Retrieved  2 January 2012.
          28. **^** Dunlap 2013: "The campaign has been waged by a loose coalition of industrial (especially fossil fuels) interests and conservative foundations and think tanks… These actors are greatly aided by conservative media and politicians, and more recently by a bevy of skeptical bloggers."
          29. **^** David Michaels (2008) _Doubt is Their Product: How Industry's Assault on Science Threatens Your Health_.
          30. **^** Hoggan, James; Littlemore, Richard (2009). _Climate Cover-Up: The Crusade to Deny Global Warming_. Vancouver: Greystone Books. ISBN 978-1-55365-485-8. Retrieved 19 March 2010. See, e.g., p31 _ff_ , describing industry-based advocacy strategies in the context of climate change denial, and p73 _ff_ , describing involvement of free-market think tanks in climate-change denial.
          31. **^** Xifra, Jordi (2016). "Climate Change Deniers and Advocacy: A Situational Theory of Publics Approach". _American Behavioral Scientist_. **60** (3): 276–287. doi:10.1177/0002764215613403.
          32. **^** Brulle, Robert (2014). "Institutionalizing delay: foundation funding and the creation of U.S. climate change counter-movement organizations". _Climatic Change_. **122** (4): 681–694. doi:10.1007/s10584-013-1018-7.
          33. **^** Goldenberg, Suzanne (14 February 2013). "Secret funding helped build vast network of climate denial thinktanks". _The Guardian_. London. Retrieved  1 March 2013.
          34. **^** Pilkington, Ed (14 November 2013). "Facebook and Microsoft help fund rightwing lobby network, report finds". _The Guardian_. Retrieved  17 November 2013.
          35. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Egan, Timothy (5 November 2015). "Exxon Mobil and the G.O.P.: Fossil Fools". _The New York Times_. Retrieved  9 November 2015.
          36. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Goldenberg, Suzanne (8 July 2015). "Exxon knew of climate change in 1981, email says – but it funded deniers for 27 more years". _The Guardian_. Retrieved  9 November 2015.
          37. **^** 'Shell knew': oil giant's 1991 film warned of climate change danger, _The Guardian_
          38. **^** Painter & Ashe 2012: "'Climate scepticism' and 'climate denial' are readily used concepts, referring to a discourse that has become important in public debate since climate change was first put firmly on the policy agenda in 1988. This discourse challenges the views of mainstream climate scientists and environmental policy advocates, contending that parts, or all, of the scientific treatment and political interpretation of climate change are unreliable."
          39. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ National Center for Science Education 2012: "There is debate…about how to refer to the positions that reject, and to the people who doubt or deny, the scientific community's consensus on…climate change. Many such people prefer to call themselves skeptics and describe their position as climate change skepticism. Their opponents, however, often prefer to call such people climate change deniers and to describe their position as climate change denial… "Denial" is the term preferred even by many deniers."
          40. **^** Rennie 2009: "Within the community of scientists and others concerned about anthropogenic climate change, those whom Inhofe calls skeptics are more commonly termed contrarians, naysayers and denialists."
          41. **^** Brown 1996, pp. 9, 11 "Indeed, the 'skeptic' scientists 14 were perceived to be all the more credible precisely _because_ their views were contrary to the consensus of peer-reviewed science.
        

      1. All scientists are skeptics because the scientific process demands continuing questioning. In this report, however, the scientists we refer to as 'skeptics' are those who have taken a highly visible public role in criticizing the scientific consensus on ozone depletion and climate change through publications and statements addressed more to the media and the public than to the scientific community."

        1. **^** Gelbspan 1998, pp. 69–70, 246 At 16 November 1995 United States House Science Subcommittee on Energy hearing, Pat Michaels testified of "a small minority" opposing the IPCC assessment, and said "that the so-called skeptics were right".
        2. **^** Antilla 2005, p. footnote 5
        3. **^** Gelbspan 1995
        4. **^** Painter  & Ashe 2012: "The term 'climate scepticism' emerged in around 1995, the year journalist Ross Gelbspan authored perhaps the first book focusing directly on what would retrospectively be understood as climate scepticism."
        5. **^** Gelbspan 1998 p. 3 "But some individuals do not want the public to know about the immediacy and extent of the climate threat. They have been waging a persistent campaign of denial and suppression that has been lamentably effective."  
pp. 33–34 "The campaign to keep the climate change off the public agenda
involves more than the undisclosed funding of these 'greenhouse skeptics.' In
their efforts to challenge the consensus scientific view….."  
p. 35 "If the climate skeptics have succeeded in confusing the general public,
their influence on decision makers has been, if anything, even more effective"  
p. 173 "pervasive denial of global warming"

        6. **^** CBC News: the fifth estate 2007: " _The Denial Machine_ investigates the roots of the campaign to negate the science and the threat of global warming. It tracks the activities of a group of scientists, some of whom previously consulted for Big Tobacco, and who are now receiving donations from major coal and oil companies. … The documentary shows how fossil fuel corporations have kept the global warming debate alive long after most scientists believed that global warming was real and had potentially catastrophic consequences. … _The Denial Machine_ also explores how the arguments supported by oil companies were adopted by policy makers in both Canada and the U.S. and helped form government policy."

        7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Orlóci 2008, pp. 86, 97: "The ideological justification for this came from the sceptics (e.g., Lomborg 2001a,b) and from the industrial 'denial machine'. … CBC Television Fifth Estate, 15 November 2006, The Climate Denial Machine, Canada.
        8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Begley 2007: "If you think those who have long challenged the mainstream scientific findings about global warming recognize that the game is over, think again. … outside Hollywood, Manhattan and other habitats of the chattering classes, the denial machine is running at full throttle—and continuing to shape both government policy and public opinion. Since the late 1980s, this well-coordinated, well-funded campaign by contrarian scientists, free-market think tanks and industry has created a paralyzing fog of doubt around climate change. Through advertisements, op-eds, lobbying and media attention, greenhouse doubters (they hate being called deniers) argued first that the world is not warming; measurements indicating otherwise are flawed, they said. Then they claimed that any warming is natural, not caused by human activities. Now they contend that the looming warming will be minuscule and harmless. 'They patterned what they did after the tobacco industry,' says former senator Tim Wirth"
        9. **^** Norgaard, Kari (2011). _Living in Denial: Climate Change, Emotions, and Everyday Life_. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. pp. 1–4. ISBN 978-0-262-01544-8.
        10. **^** Mann, Michael E. (2013). _The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars: Dispatches from the Front Lines_. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-52638-8. "Skepticism plays an essential role in the progress of science… Yet…in the context of the climate change denial movement… the term _skeptic_ has often been co-opted to describe those who simply deny, rather than appraise critically."
        11. **^** Jenkins 2015, p. 229: "many who deny the consensus on climate change are not really skeptics but rather contrarians who practice "a kind of one-sided skepticism that entails simply rejecting evidence that challenges one's preconceptions" (Mann 2012:26)"
        12. **^** National Center for Science Education 2012: "Recognizing that no terminological choice is entirely unproblematic, NCSE — in common with a number of scholarly and journalistic observers of the social controversies surrounding climate change — opts to use the terms "climate changer deniers" and "climate change denial""
        13. **^** Weart 2015 footnote 136a: "I do not mean to use the term "denier" pejoratively—it has been accepted by some of the group as a self-description—but simply to designate those who deny any likelihood of future danger from anthropogenic global warming."
        14. **^** Anderegg, William R. L.; anderegg@stanford.edu; Prall, James W.; Harold, Jacob (19 July 2010). "Reply to O'Neill and Boykoff: Objective classification of climate experts". _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_. **107** (39): E152. Bibcode:2010PNAS..107E.152A. doi:10.1073/pnas.1010824107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2947900.
        15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Gillis, Justin (12 February 2015). "Verbal Warming: Labels in the Climate Debate". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 30 June 2015.
        16. **^** Timmer 2014: "some of the people who deserve that label are offended by it, thinking it somehow lumps them in with holocaust deniers. But that in its own way is a form of denial; the word came into use before the holocaust, and… denialism has been used as a label for people who refuse to accept the evidence for all sorts of things: HIV causing AIDS, vaccines being safe, etc."
        17. **^** Boslough 2014
        18. **^** "NY Times Public Editor: We're "Moving In A Good Direction" On Properly Describing Climate Deniers". _Media Matters for America_. 22 June 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015.
        19. **^** https://act.forecastthefacts.org/sign/ap_deniers_skeptics/. Retrieved 22 May 2019. Missing or empty `|title=` (help)
        20. **^** https://blog.ap.org/announcements/an-addition-to-ap-stylebook-entry-on-global-warming. Retrieved 22 May 2019. Missing or empty `|title=` (help)
        21. **^** Schlanger, Zoë (24 September 2015). "The real skeptics behind the AP decision to put an end to the term 'climate skeptics'". _Newsweek_. Retrieved 22 May 2019.
        22. **^** Carrington, Damian (17 May 2019). "Why the Guardian is changing the language it uses about the environment". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 22 May 2019.
        23. **^** Conway  & Oreskes 2010, p. 170: "The doubts and confusion of the American people are particularly peculiar when put into historical perspective"
        24. **^** Powell 2012, pp. 36–39
        25. **^** Weart 2015a: "From the late 1940s into the 1960s, many of the papers cited in these essays carried a thought-provoking footnote: "This work was supported by the 'Office of Naval Research.' "
        26. **^** Weart 2007
        27. **^** Weart 2015a: quote p. viii in the Foreword by Climate Research Board chair Verner E. Suomi
        28. **^** Charney, Jule Gregory (23 July 1979). _Carbon Dioxide and Climate: A Scientific Assessment, Report of an Ad Hoc Study Group on Carbon Dioxide and Climate_. Woods Hole, Massachusetts: National Research Council. Retrieved 22 September 2017.
        29. **^** "US firms knew about global warming in 1968 – what about Australia?". _The Conversation_. 2016.
        30. **^** Weart 2015a: Global Warming Becomes a Political Issue (1980–1983); "In 1981, Ronald Reagan took the presidency with an administration that openly scorned their concerns. He brought with him a backlash that had been building against the environmental movement. Many conservatives denied nearly every environmental worry, global warming included. They lumped all such concerns together as the rants of business-hating liberals, a Trojan Horse for government regulation." For details, see Money for Keeling: Monitoring CO2
        31. **^** Weart, Spencer R. (30 June 2009). _The Discovery of Global Warming_. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-04497-5.
        32. **^** Weart 2015: Breaking into Politics (1980–1988), "Sherwood Idso, who published arguments that greenhouse gas emissions would not warm the Earth or bring any other harm to climate. Better still, by fertilizing crops, the increase of CO2 would bring tremendous benefits."
        33. **^** Hansen, James (1988). "Statement of Dr. James Hansen, director, NASA Goddard Institute for space studies" (PDF). _Climate Change ProCon.org_. Retrieved 30 November 2015.
        34. **^** Weart 2015 The Summer of 1988: "A new breed of interdisciplinary studies was showing that even a few degrees of warming might have harsh consequences, both for fragile natural ecosystems and for certain agricultural systems and other human endeavours …. The timing was right, and the media leaped on the story. Hansen's statements, especially that severe warming was likely within the next 50 years, got on the front pages of newspapers and were featured in television news and radio talk shows…. The story grew as the summer of 1988 wore on. Reporters descended unexpectedly upon an international conference of scientists held in Toronto at the end of June. Their stories prominently reported how the world's leading climate scientists declared that atmospheric changes were already causing harm, and might cause much more; the scientists called for vigorous government action to restrict greenhouse gases."
        35. **^** Weart 2015: "Environmentalist organizations continued… lobbying and advertising efforts to argue for restrictions on emissions. The environmentalists were opposed, and greatly outspent, by industries that produced or relied on fossil fuels. Industry groups not only mounted a sustained and professional public relations effort, but also channeled considerable sums of money to individual scientists and small conservative organizations and publications that denied any need to act against global warming."
        36. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Begley 2007: "Through advertisements, op-eds, lobbying and media attention, greenhouse doubters (they hate being called deniers) argued first that the world is not warming… Then they claimed that any warming is natural… Now they contend that the looming warming will be minuscule and harmless. 'They patterned what they did after the tobacco industry,' says former senator Tim Wirth… 'Both figured, sow enough doubt, call the science uncertain and in dispute. That's had a huge impact on both the public and Congress.'"
        37. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Weart 2015: "The technical criticism most widely noted in the press came in several brief "reports"—not scientific papers in the usual sense—published between 1989 and 1992 by the conservative George C. Marshall Institute. The anonymously authored pamphlets … [claimed] that proposed government regulation would be "extraordinarily costly to the U.S. economy," they insisted it would be unwise to act on the basis of the existing global warming theories … In 1989 some of the biggest corporations in the petroleum, automotive, and other industries created a Global Climate Coalition, whose mission was to disparage every call for action against global warming."
        38. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Conway  & Oreskes 2010: "Millions of pages of documents released during tobacco litigation … show the crucial role that scientists played in sowing doubt about the links between smoking and health risks. These documents … also show that the same strategy was applied not only to global warming, but to a laundry list of environmental and health concerns, including asbestos, secondhand smoke, acid rain, and the ozone hole."
        39. **^** Weart 2015: "Scientists noticed something that the public largely overlooked: the most outspoken scientific critiques of global warming predictions did not appear in the standard peer-reviewed scientific publications. The critiques tended to appear in venues funded by industrial groups, or in conservative media like the Wall Street Journal."
        40. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Conway  & Oreskes 2010
        41. **^** Weart 2011, p. 46: "Scientists continually test their beliefs, seeking out all possible contrary arguments and evidence, and finally publish their findings in peer-reviewed journals, where further attempts at refutation are encouraged. But the small group of scientists who opposed the consensus on warming proceeded in the manner of lawyers, considering nothing that would not bolster their case, and publishing mostly in pamphlets, books, and newspapers supported by conservative interests. At some point they were no longer skeptics—people who would try to see every side of a case—but deniers, that is, people whose only interest was in casting doubt upon what other scientists agreed was true."
        42. **^** Weart 2011, pp. 47: "As the deniers found ever less scientific ground to stand on, they turned to political arguments. Some of these policy arguments were straightforward, raising serious questions about the efficacy and expense of proposed carbon taxes and emission-regulation schemes. But leading deniers also resorted toad hominem tactics… On each side, some people were coming to believe that they faced a dishonest conspiracy, driven by ideological bias and naked self-interest"
        43. **^** Jacques, Dunlap  & Freeman 2008, pp. 349–385: "Environmental scepticism encompasses several themes, but denial of the authenticity of environmental problems, particularly problems such as biodiversity loss or climate change that threaten ecological sustainability, is its defining feature"
        44. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ (Hamilton 2011, pp. 104–106): "the tactics, personnel and organisations mobilised to serve the interests of the tobacco lobby in the 1980s were seamlessly transferred to serve the interests of the fossil-fuel lobby in the 1990s. Frederick Seitz … the task of the climate sceptics in the think tanks and PR companies hired by fossil fuel companies was to engage in 'consciousness lowering activities', to 'de-problematise' global warming by describing it as a form of politically driven panicmongering." For the tobacco company memo, see "Original "Doubt is our product…" memo". University of California, San Francisco. 21 August 1969. Retrieved 19 March 2010.
        45. **^** Conway  & Oreskes 2010, p. 105: "As recently as 2007, the George Marshall Institute continued to insist that the damages associated with acid rain were always "largely hypothetical," and that "further scientific investigation revealed that most of them were not in fact occurring." The Institute cited no studies to support this extraordinary claim."
        46. **^** Weart 2015: "Public support for environmental concerns in general seems to have waned after 1988."
        47. **^** Weart 2015: "A study of American media found that in 1987 most items that mentioned the greenhouse effect had been feature stories about the science, whereas in 1988 the majority of the stories addressed the politics of the controversy. It was not that the number of science stories declined, but rather that as media coverage doubled and redoubled, the additional stories moved into social and political areas … Before 1988, the journalists had drawn chiefly on scientists for their information, but afterward they relied chiefly on sources who were identified with political positions or special interest groups."
        48. **^** Wald, Matthew L. (8 July 1991). "Pro-Coal Ad Campaign Disputes Warming Idea". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 1 March 2013.
        49. **^** Begley 2007: "Individual companies and industry associations—representing petroleum, steel, autos and utilities, for instance—formed lobbying groups … [the Information Council on the Environment's] game plan called for enlisting greenhouse doubters to "reposition global warming as theory rather than fact," and to sow doubt about climate research just as cigarette makers had about smoking research … The coal industry's Western Fuels Association paid Michaels to produce a newsletter called World Climate Report, which has regularly trashed mainstream climate science."
        50. **^** Cox, Robert (2009). _Environmental Communication and the Public Sphere_. Sage. pp. 311–312. "to recruit a cadre of scientists who share the industry's views of climate science and to train them in public relations so they can help convince journalists, politicians and the public that the risk of global warming is too uncertain to justify controls on greenhouse gases"
        51. **^** Cushman, John, "Industrial Group Plans to Battle Climate Treaty", _The New York Times_ , 25 April 1998. Retrieved 10 March 2010.
        52. **^** Gelbspan 1998, pp. 3, 35, 46, 197.
        53. **^** Michael A. Milburn; Sheree D. Conrad (January 1998). _The Politics of Denial_. MIT Press. pp. 216–. ISBN 978-0-262-63184-6. "Here again, as in the case of ozone depletion, economic and psychological forces are operating to produce a level of denial that threatens future generations."
        54. **^** Painter  & Ashe 2012: "Academics took note of the discourse when they began to analyse media representations of climate change knowledge and its effect on public perceptions and policy-making, but in the 1990s, they did not yet focus on it as a coherent and defined phenomenon. This changed in the 2000s, when McCright and Dunlap played an important role in deepening the concept of climate scepticism."
        55. **^** Painter  & Ashe 2012: "McCright and Dunlap played an important role in deepening the concept of climate scepticism. Examining what they termed a 'conservative countermovement' to undermine climate change policy…McCright and Dunlap went beyond the study of media representations of climate change knowledge to give a coherent picture of the movement behind climate scepticism in the US."
        56. **^** Jacques, Peter J.; Dunlap, Riley E.; Freeman, Mark (2008). "The organisation of denial: Conservative think tanks and environmental scepticism". _Environmental Politics_. **17** (3): 349–385. doi:10.1080/09644010802055576.
        57. **^** BloombergBusiness (2015). "Unearthing America's Deep Network of Climate Change Deniers".
        58. **^** Justin Farrell (2015). "Network structure and influence of the climate change counter-movement". _Nature Climate Change_. **6** (4): 370–374. Bibcode:2016NatCC...6..370F. doi:10.1038/nclimate2875.
        59. **^** Gelbspan, Ross (22 July 2004). "An excerpt from Boiling Point by Ross Gelbspan". _Grist_. Retrieved 1 June 2015.
        60. **^** Wayne A. White (18 October 2012). _Biosequestration and Ecological Diversity: Mitigating and Adapting to Climate Change and Environmental Degradation_. CRC Press. p. 206. ISBN 978-1-4398-5363-4. "Climate change denial and discrediting climate science have become pivotal to the antiregulatory cause of neoliberals."
        61. **^** Antilla 2005: "At the centre of this climate backlash is a group of dissident scientists. The number of these climate sceptics is greater in the US than in any other country. Although the peer-reviewed scientific literature agrees with the IPCC, within the media—wherefrom the majority of adults in the US are informed about science—claims that are dismissive of anthropogenic climate change are prominently featured."
        62. **^** Jenkins 2015, p. 243: "the community of climate change contrarians also includes a host of amateurs, from talk radio hosts to newspaper columnists to bloggers. In particular, the tremendous growth of the Internet has given sustenance to the contrarian movement"
        63. **^** Nuccitelli, Dana (2015). "The Paris agreement signals that deniers have lost the climate wars". _The Guardian_.
        64. **^** Davenport, Coral (12 December 2015). "Nations Approve Landmark Climate Accord in Paris". _The New York Times_.
        65. **^** editor, Jonathan Watts Global environment (15 November 2018). "Brazil's new foreign minister believes climate change is a Marxist plot". _The Guardian_. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 25 January 2019.
        66. **^** Escobar, Herton (22 January 2019). "Brazil's new president has scientists worried. Here's why". _Science | AAAS_. Retrieved 25 January 2019.
        67. **^** DiMento, J. and Doughman, P. (2017). Climate Change: What it Means for Us, Our Children, and Our Grandchildren. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 25-29.
        68. **^** McCright, Aaron M.; Dunlap, Riley E. (1 October 2011). "Cool dudes: The denial of climate change among conservative white males in the United States". _Global Environmental Change_. **21** (4): 1163–1172. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.06.003.
        69. **^** Howe, Peter D.; Mildenberger, Matto; Marlon, Jennifer R.; Leiserowitz, Anthony (1 January 2015). "Geographic variation in opinions on climate change at state and local scales in the USA". _Nature Climate Change_. **5** (6): 596–603. Bibcode:2015NatCC...5..596H. doi:10.1038/nclimate2583. ISSN 1758-678X.
        70. **^** Morrison, David (2018). "Some Good News on Climate: A Big Shift among TV Weathercasters". _Skeptical Inquirer_. **42** (5): 6.
        71. **^** "After Brexit, Clexit" (PDF). _Clexit_. 1 August 2016. Retrieved 5 September 2018.
        72. **^** "Clexit now comprises 190 members from 26 countries" (PDF). _Clexit_. 2016. Retrieved 5 September 2018.
        73. **^** Nuccitelli, Dana (8 August 2016). "Rejection of experts spreads from Brexit to climate change with 'Clexit' - Dana Nuccitelli". _the Guardian_. Retrieved 15 April 2018.
        74. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Rennie 2009: "Claim 1: Anthropogenic CO2 can't be changing climate, because CO2 is only a trace gas in the atmosphere and the amount produced by humans is dwarfed by the amount from volcanoes and other natural sources. Water vapor is by far the most important greenhouse gas, so changes in CO2 are irrelevant."
        75. **^** Rennie 2009: " According to the U.S. Geological Survey, anthropogenic CO2 amounts to about 30 billion tons annually—more than 130 times as much as volcanoes produce."
        76. **^** Archer, David (6 April 2005). "Water vapour: feedback or forcing?". _RealClimate_. Retrieved 5 September 2018.
        77. **^** Rennie 2009: "from Arrhenius on, climatologists have incorporated water vapor into their models. In fact, water vapor is why rising CO2 has such a big effect on climate… Nevertheless, within this dynamic, the CO2 remains the main driver… of the greenhouse effect."
        78. **^** Rennie 2009: "Claim 3: Global warming stopped a decade ago; Earth has been cooling since then."
        79. **^** Rennie 2009: "Claim 4: The sun or cosmic rays are much more likely to be the real causes of global warming. After all, Mars is warming up, too."
        80. **^** Rennie 2009: "But in defiance of the naysayers who want to chalk the recent warming up to natural cycles, there is insufficient evidence that enough extra solar energy is reaching our planet to account for the observed rise in global temperatures."
        81. **^** Waldman, Scott (17 May 2018). "Republican lawmaker: Rocks tumbling into ocean causing sea level rise". Science. Retrieved 17 May 2018.
        82. **^** Rennie 2009: "Claim 7: Technological fixes, such as inventing energy sources that don't produce CO2 or geoengineering the climate, would be more affordable, prudent ways to address climate change than reducing our carbon footprint."
        83. **^** Rennie 2009: "Claim 5: Climatologists conspire to hide the truth about global warming by locking away their data. Their so-called "consensus" on global warming is scientifically irrelevant because science isn't settled by popularity.... Claim 6: Climatologists have a vested interest in raising the alarm because it brings them money and prestige."
        84. **^** White, Rob (2012). _Climate Change from a Criminological Perspective_. Springer Science  & Business Media. p. 49. ISBN 978-1-4614-3640-9. "many Americans, including many American politicians and decision-makers, are increasingly viewing climate change as a "left-wing plot"–part of the "one-world socialist agenda" or a "conspiracy to impose world government and a sweeping redistribution of wealth." Just as Republican Senator James Inhofe of Oklahoma proclaimed on the Senate floor that "[g]lobal warming is the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the American people", many Americans believe that climate change is "a cynical hoax perpetrated by climate scientists… greedy for grants.""
        85. **^** Uscinski, Joseph E.; Douglas, Karen; Lewandowsky, Stephan (September 2017). "Climate Change Conspiracy Theories". _Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science_. **1**. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.328.
        86. **^** Rennie 2009: "If there were a massive conspiracy to defraud the world on climate (and to what end?), surely the thousands of e-mails and other files stolen from the University of East Anglia's Climatic Research Unit and distributed by hackers on November 20 would bear proof of it. So far, however, none has emerged. Most of the few statements that critics claim as evidence of malfeasance seem to have more innocent explanations that make sense in the context of scientists conversing privately and informally."
        87. **^** Eight major investigations on the leaked emails include: House of Commons Science and Technology Committee (UK); Independent Climate Change Review (UK); International Science Assessment Panel ("Oxburgh panel") Reed, Sarah (14 April 2010). "Oxburgh Report Clears Controversial Climate Research Unit". _Science_. Retrieved 22 September 2017. (UK); Pennsylvania State University first panel Kintisch, Eli (3 February 2010). "Climate Scientist Mann Partially Absolved by Penn State". _Science_. Retrieved 22 September 2017. and second panel Kintisch, Eli (1 July 2010). "Michael Mann Exonerated as Penn State Inquiry Finds 'No Substance' To Allegations". _Science_. (US); United States Environmental Protection Agency (US); Department of Commerce (US); National Science Foundation (US)
        88. **^** Anderegg, William R L; Prall, James W.; Harold, Jacob; Schneider, Stephen H. (2010). "Expert credibility in climate change". _Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A_. **107** (27): 12107–9. Bibcode:2010PNAS..10712107A. doi:10.1073/pnas.1003187107. PMC 2901439. PMID 20566872. " (i) 97–98% of the climate researchers most actively publishing in the field support the tenets of ACC (Anthropogenic Climate Change) outlined by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and (ii) the relative climate expertise and scientific prominence of the researchers unconvinced of ACC are substantially below that of the convinced researchers."
        89. **^** Rennie 2009: "Climatologists are frequently frustrated by accusations that they are hiding their data or the details of their models because, as Gavin Schmidt points out, much of the relevant information is in public databases or otherwise accessible—a fact that contrarians conveniently ignore when insisting that scientists stonewall their requests."
        90. **^** Lewandowsky, Stephan; Oberauer, Klaus (2013). "NASA Faked the Moon Landing—Therefore, (Climate) Science Is a Hoax". _Psychological Science_. **24** (5): 622–633. doi:10.1177/0956797612457686. PMID 23531484.
        91. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Rahmstorf, S., 2004, The climate sceptics: Weather Catastrophes and Climate Change—Is There Still Hope For Us? (Munich: PG Verlag) pp 76–83 [note: numbering not shown in original]
        92. **^** Painter  & Ashe 2012: "We focused on the marked differences in what climate sceptics are sceptical about … (1) trend sceptics (who deny the global warming trend), (2) attribution sceptics (who accept the trend, but either question the anthropogenic contribution saying it is overstated, negligent or non-existent compared to other factors like natural variation, or say it is not known with sufficient certainty what the main causes are) and (3) impact sceptics (who accept human causation, but claim impacts may be benign or beneficial, or that the models are not robust enough) and/or question the need for strong regulatory policies or interventions. "
        93. **^** Dunlap  & Jacques 2013, p. 702: "These books reject evidence that global warming is occurring, that human actions are the predominant cause of global warming, and/or that global warming will have negative impacts on human and natural systems. These arguments have been labelled trend, attribution, and impact denial (Rahmstorf, 2004). … We located 108 books espousing one or more of these versions of climate change denial published through 2010"
        94. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Michael E. Mann (13 August 2013). _The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars: Dispatches from the Front Lines_. Columbia University Press. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-231-52638-8.
        95. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Monbiot, George (19 September 2006). "The denial industry". _The Guardian_. London.
        96. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ellen Goodman (9 February 2007). "No change in political climate". _The Boston Globe_. Retrieved 30 August 2008.
        97. **^** George Monbiot (27 February 2009). "Climate change: The semantics of denial". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 27 May 2015.
        98. **^** Christoff, Peter (9 July 2007). "Climate change is another grim tale to be treated with respect – Opinion". _Theage.com.au_. Melbourne. Retrieved 19 March 2010.
        99. **^** Connelly, Joel (10 July 2007). "Deniers of global warming harm us". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved 25 December 2009.
        100. **^** "Timeline, Climate Change and its Naysayers". _Newsweek_. 13 August 2007.
        101. **^** Liu, D. W. C. (2012). "Science Denial and the Science Classroom". _CBE- Life Sciences Education_. **11** (2): 129–134. doi:10.1187/cbe.12-03-0029. PMC 3366896. PMID 22665586. Retrieved 30 June 2015.
        102. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hoofnagle, Mark (11 March 2009). "Climate change deniers: failsafe tips on how to spot them". _the Guardian_. Retrieved 30 June 2015.
        103. **^** Balakrishnan, Anita (13 October 2016). "Denial of climate change, AI puts American economy on 'path to ruin,' Obama says". CNBC.
        104. **^** "Obama's Catastrophic Climate-Change Denial" by Bill McKibben, NY Times op-ed, 12 May 2015.
        105. **^** "NCSE Tackles Climate Change Denial". _National Center for Science Education_. 13 January 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2015. "Science education is under attack… by climate change deniers, who ignore a mountain of evidence gathered over the last fifty years that the planet is warming and that humans are largely responsible. These deniers attempt to sabotage science education with fringe ideas, pseudoscience, and outright lies."
        106. **^** Lahsen, Myanna (Winter 2005). "Technocracy, Democracy, and the U.S. Climate Politics: The Need for Demarcations". _Science, Technology, & Human Values_. **30** : 137–169. doi:10.1177/0162243904270710. "Numerous high-ranked officers in the Clinton-Gore administration sought to dismiss all critics of the climate paradigm as "pseudoscientists""
        107. **^** Brown, Michael. Adversaries, zombies and NIPCC climate pseudoscience, _Phys.org_ , 26 September 2013
        108. **^** Brown 1996, p. 28: "As the scientific fringe has become institutionalized, professionalized, and lionized… One finds that a fundamental difference between the traditional scientific establishment and the emerging "skeptic" establishment relates to their ultimate scientific goals. The former has traditionally emphasized the generation of new knowledge as a measure of productivity. That is, the collection of original data, construction of new mathematical techniques, and generation and validation of testable hypotheses have been the hallmarks of the traditional scientific community… On the other hand, the emerging culture profiled in these hearings emphasizes the generation of new perspectives. Productivity is measured on the ability to alter public opinion – through opinion pieces aimed not at their fellow scientists but at policymakers, the media, and the general public – and funding flows accordingly."
        109. **^** Morrison, David. The Parameters of Pseudoscience, _Skeptical Inquirer_ , Volume 37.2, March/April 2013. Book review of _The Pseudoscience Wars: Immanuel Velikovsky and the Birth of the Modern Fringe_ , by Michael D. Gordin.
        110. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dunlap 2013: "From the outset, there has been an organized "disinformation" campaign… to "manufacture uncertainty" over AGW, especially by attacking climate science and scientists. This appears an effective strategy given that confidence in climate science and trust in climate scientists are key factors influencing the public's views of AGW."
        111. **^** Boykoff, M.; Boykoff, J. (July 2004). "Balance as bias: global warming and the US prestige press" (PDF). _Global Environmental Change Part A_. **14** (2): 125–136. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2003.10.001. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 November 2015.
        112. **^** Antilla 2005: "One problematic trend of the US media has been the suggestion that substantive disagreement exists within the international scientific community as to the reality of anthropogenic climate change; however, this concept is false…Although the science of climate change does not appear to be a prime news topic for most of the 255 newspapers included in this study…articles that framed climate change in terms of debate, controversy, or uncertainty were plentiful."
        113. **^** Painter  & Ashe 2012: "Media analysis of climate change reporting was always of interest to academics but from the mid-2000s, it became one of the key areas of research interest, highlighting a tendency to give undue weight to voices questioning the science of climate change."
        114. **^** Antilla 2005: "Not only were there many examples of journalistic balance that led to bias, but some of the news outlets repeatedly used climate sceptics—with known fossil fuel industry ties—as primary definers"
        115. **^** Dispensa, Jaclyn Marisa; Brulle, Robert J. (2003). "Media's social construction of environmental issues: focus on global warming – a comparative study". _International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy_. **23** (10): 74–105. doi:10.1108/01443330310790327. ISSN 0144-333X.
        116. **^** Painter  & Ashe 2012: "news coverage of scepticism is mostly limited to the USA and the UK…the type of sceptics who question whether global temperatures are warming are almost exclusively found in the US and UK newspapers. Sceptics who challenge the need for robust action to combat climate change also have a much stronger presence in the media of the same two countries. "
        117. **^** David, Adam (20 September 2006). "Royal Society tells Exxon: stop funding climate change denial". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 12 January 2009.
        118. **^** Sandell, Clayton (3 January 2007). "Report: Big Money Confusing Public on Global Warming". ABC News. Retrieved 12 January 2009.
        119. **^** Painter  & Ashe 2012: "in the USA and the UK… sceptical voices generally appear in much higher numbers… in France, the UK and the USA… right-leaning newspapers are much more likely to include uncontested sceptical voices."
        120. **^** Saad, Lydia (21 March 2007). "Did Hollywood's Glare Heat Up Public Concern About Global Warming?". Gallup. Retrieved 12 January 2010.
        121. **^** Holthaus, Eric (6 April 2015). "Poll: Americans Don't Think Climate Change Will Affect Them Personally". _Slate_. ISSN 1091-2339. Retrieved 15 November 2015.
        122. **^** Boykoff, M.T.; Boykoff, J.M. (2004). "Balance as bias: Global warming and the US prestige press". Global Environmental Change. 14 (2): 125–136. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2003.10.00
        123. **^** Gifford R. (2011). "The dragons of inaction: psychological barriers that limit climate change mitigation and adaptation". _Am Psychol_. **66** (4): 290–302. doi:10.1037/a0023566. PMID 21553954.
        124. **^** "Climate denial and the populist right". _International Institute for Environment and Development_. 15 November 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2017.
        125. **^** Harari, Yuval Noah. "Transcript of "Nationalism vs. globalism: the new political divide"". Retrieved 4 March 2017.
        126. **^** Robert J. Shiller (27 March 2015). "How Idealism, Expressed in Concrete Steps, Can Fight Climate Change". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 6 March 2017.
        127. **^** Kyla Mandel (12 January 2016). "Why Are Climate Deniers Campaigning for Britain to Leave the EU?". Retrieved 5 March 2017.
        128. **^** Roger Helmer (14 October 2015). "Plenary Speech Climate Change October 14th 2015". Retrieved 6 March 2017.
        129. **^** Jacques, Dunlap  & Freeman 2008, p. 352: "While these CTTs sometimes joined corporate America in directly lobbying against environmental policies, their primary tactic in combating environmentalism has been to challenge the need for protective environmental policy by questioning the seriousness of environmental problems and the validity of environmental science."
        130. **^** Dryzek, John S.; Norgaard, Richard B.; Schlosberg, David (2011). _The Oxford Handbook of Climate Change and Society_. Oxford University Press. p. 154. ISBN 978-0-19-968342-0.
        131. **^** Borowy, Iris (2014). _Defining Sustainable Development for Our Common Future: A History of the World Commission on Environment and Development_. Routledge. p. 44. ISBN 9781135961220. "Corporations and conservative think tanks such as the Heritage Foundation, Marshall Institute], the Cato Institute and the American Enterprise Institute waged campaigns to obscure scientific evidence about acid rain, ozone depletion and climate change and, thereby, to prevent or rollback environmental, health and safety regulations."
        132. **^** Manjit, Kumar (18 October 2010). "Merchants of Doubt, By Naomi Oreskes  & Erik M Conway". _The Independent_. London. Retrieved 17 February 2013.
        133. **^** Hertsgaard, Mark (May 2006). "While Washington Slept". Vanity Fair. Retrieved 2 August 2007.
        134. **^** Painter  & Ashe 2012: "The work by McCright and Dunlap has highlighted the effectiveness of organized climate sceptic groups in influencing US policy making in the 1990s and early 2000s, including their central role in the rejection of the Kyoto Protocol by the US Congress"
        135. **^** Brulle, Robert J. (21 December 2013). "Institutionalizing delay: foundation funding and the creation of U.S. climate change counter-movement organizations". _Climatic Change_. **122** (4): 681–694. doi:10.1007/s10584-013-1018-7.
        136. **^** Goldenberg, Suzanne (20 December 2013). "Conservative groups spend up to $1bn a year to fight action on climate change". _The Guardian_. _The Guardian. Retrieved 29 January 2015._ __
        137. **^** Fischer, Douglas (23 December 2013). ""Dark Money" Funds Climate Change Denial Effort". _Scientific American_. Retrieved 29 January 2015.
        138. **^** Goldenberg, Suzanne (14 February 2013). "Secret funding helped build vast network of climate denial thinktanks". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 7 February 2015.
        139. **^** "Robert Brulle: Inside the Climate Change "Countermovement "". **Frontline**.PBS. 23 October 2012. Retrieved 21 February 2015.
        140. **^** Antilla 2005: "A number of large corporations that profit substantially from fossil fuel consumption, such as ExxonMobil, provide financial support to their political allies in an effort to undermine public trust in climate science."
        141. **^** Justin Farrell, _Corporate funding and ideological polarization about climate change_. In: _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_ 2015, doi:10.1073/pnas.1509433112.
        142. **^** https://theintercept.com/2019/05/16/coal-industry-climate-change-denial-cloud-peak-energy/
        143. **^** https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/6006068-Cloud-Peak-Energy.html
        144. **^** Sample, Ian (2 February 2007). "Scientists offered cash to dispute climate study". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 16 August 2007. "The AEI has received more than $1.6m from ExxonMobil and more than 20 of its staff have worked as consultants to the Bush administration. Lee Raymond, a former head of ExxonMobil, is the vice-chairman of AEI's board of trustees."
        145. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Begley 2007
        146. **^** Adams, David (20 September 2006). "Royal Society tells Exxon: stop funding climate change denial". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 2 August 2007.
        147. **^** Ward, Bob (4 September 2006). "Letter to Nick Thomas, Director, Corporate affairs, Esso UK Ltd. (ExxonMobil)" (PDF). London: Royal Society. Retrieved 6 August 2007.
        148. **^** "Interfaith Stewardship Alliance Newsletter" (PDF). _Moyers on America_. 2006. Retrieved 10 December 2014.
        149. **^** "Gore takes aim at corporately funded climate research". CBC News from Associated Press. 7 August 2007. Retrieved 16 August 2007.
        150. **^** Jennings, Katie, Grandoni, Dino,  & Rust, Susanne. (23 October 2015) "How Exxon went from leader to skeptic on climate change research". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 26 October 2015. LA Times website
        151. **^** Revkin, Andrew C. Industry Ignored Its Scientists on Climate, _The New York Times_. 23 April 2009.
        152. **^** Bradsher, Keith (7 December 1999). "Ford Announces Its Withdrawal From Global Climate Coalition". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 21 July 2013. "the Ford Motor Company said today that it would pull out of the Global Climate Coalition, a group of big manufacturers and oil and mining companies that lobbies against restrictions on emissions of gases linked to global warming."
        153. **^** "GCC Suffers Technical Knockout, Industry defections decimate Global Climate Coalition".
        154. **^** Broder, John M. (20 October 2010). "Climate Change Doubt Is Tea Party Article of Faith". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 17 September 2017. "The oil, coal and utility industries have collectively spent $500 million just since the beginning of 2009 to lobby against legislation to address climate change and to defeat candidates, like Mr. Hill, who support it, according to a new analysis from the Center for American Progress Action Fund..."
        155. **^** Weiss, Daniel J.; Lefton, Rebecca; Lyon, Susan (27 September 2010). "Dirty Money, Oil Companies and Special Interests Spend Millions to Oppose Climate Legislation". Center for American Progress Action Fund. Retrieved 17 September 2017. "The oil, gas, and coal industries have spent over $2 billion lobbying Congress since 1999. These three industries combined spent a whopping $543 million on lobbying in 2009 and the first two quarters of 2010."
        156. **^** Gillis, Justin; Schartz, John (21 February 2015). "Deeper Ties to Corporate Cash for Doubtful Climate Researcher". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 7 March 2015. "newly released documents show the extent to which Dr. Soon's work has been tied to funding he received from corporate interests. He has accepted more than $1.2 million in money from the fossil-fuel industry over the last decade while failing to disclose that conflict of interest in most of his scientific papers. At least 11 papers he has published since 2008 omitted such a disclosure, and in at least eight of those cases, he appears to have violated ethical guidelines of the journals that published his work. The documents show that Dr. Soon, in correspondence with his corporate funders, described many of his scientific papers as "deliverables" that he completed in exchange for their money."
        157. **^** Goldenberg, Suzanne (21 February 2015). "Work of prominent climate change denier was funded by energy industry". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 7 March 2015. "Over the last 14 years Willie Soon, a researcher at the Harvard-Smithsonian Centre for Astrophysics, received a total of $1.25m from Exxon Mobil, Southern Company, the American Petroleum Institute (API) and a foundation run by the ultra-conservative Koch brothers… the biggest single funder was Southern Company, one of the country's biggest electricity providers that relies heavily on coal."
        158. **^** Schwartz, John (25 February 2015). "Lawmakers Seek Information on Funding for Climate Change Critics". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 7 March 2015. "Charles R. Alcock, director of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, said last week that a contract provision with funders of Dr. Soon's work that appeared to prohibit disclosure of funding sources "was a mistake." "We will not permit similar wording in future grant agreements""
        159. **^** Båtstrand, Sondre (2015). "More than Markets: A Comparative Study of Nine Conservative Parties on Climate Change". _Politics and Policy_. **43** (4): 538–561. doi:10.1111/polp.12122. ISSN 1747-1346. " The U.S. Republican Party is an anomaly in denying anthropogenic climate change."
        160. **^** Chait, Jonathan (27 September 2015). "Why Are Republicans the Only Climate-Science-Denying Party in the World?". _New York_. Retrieved 20 September 2017. "Of all the major conservative parties in the democratic world, the Republican Party stands alone in its denial of the legitimacy of climate science. Indeed, the Republican Party stands alone in its conviction that no national or international response to climate change is needed. To the extent that the party is divided on the issue, the gap separates candidates who openly dismiss climate science as a hoax, and those who, shying away from the political risks of blatant ignorance, instead couch their stance in the alleged impossibility of international action."
        161. **^** "Frontline: Hot Politics: Interviews: Frank Luntz". PBS. 13 November 2006. Retrieved 19 March 2010.
        162. **^** Davenport, Coral; Lipton, Eric (3 June 2017). "How G.O.P. Leaders Came to View Climate Change as Fake Science". _The New York Times_. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 22 September 2017. "The Republican Party's fast journey from debating how to combat human-caused climate change to arguing that it does not exist is a story of big political money, Democratic hubris in the Obama years and a partisan chasm that grew over nine years like a crack in the Antarctic shelf, favoring extreme positions and uncompromising rhetoric over cooperation and conciliation."
        163. **^** Warner, Judith (27 February 2011). "Fact-Free Science". _The New York Times Magazine_. pp. 11–12. Retrieved 9 September 2017. "It would be easier to believe in this great moment of scientific reawakening, of course, if more than half of the Republicans in the House and three-quarters of Republican senators did not now say that the threat of global warming, as a man-made and highly threatening phenomenon, is at best an exaggeration and at worst an utter "hoax," as James Inhofe of Oklahoma, the ranking Republican on the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, once put it. These grim numbers, compiled by the Center for American Progress, describe a troubling new reality: the rise of the Tea Party and its anti-intellectual, anti-establishment, anti-elite worldview has brought both a mainstreaming and a radicalization of anti-scientific thought."
        164. **^** Matthews, Chris (12 May 2014). "Hardball With Chris Matthews for May 12, 2014". _Hardball With Chris Matthews_. MSNBC. NBC news - via ProQuest. " According to a survey by the Center for American Progress' Action Fund, more than 55 percent of congressional Republicans are climate change deniers. And it gets worse from there. They found that 77 percent of Republicans on the House Science Committee say they don't believe it in either. And that number balloons to an astounding 90 percent for all the party's leadership in Congress."
        165. **^** EarthTalk (22 December 2014). "How Does Climate Denial Persist?". _Scientific American_. Retrieved 25 September 2017. "...a recent survey by the non-profit Center for American Progress found that some 58 percent of Republicans in the U.S. Congress still "refuse to accept climate change.""
        166. **^** Kliegman, Julie (18 May 2014). "Jerry Brown says 'virtually no Republican' in Washington accepts climate change science". _PolitiFact_. _Tampa Bay Times_. Retrieved 18 September 2017.
        167. **^** McCarthy, Tom (17 November 2014). "Meet the Republicans in Congress who don't believe climate change is real". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 18 September 2017. "It's much easier to list Republicans in Congress who think climate change is real than it is to list Republicans who don't, because there are so few members of the former group. Earlier this year, Politifact went looking for congressional Republicans who had not expressed scepticism about climate change and came up with a list of eight (out of 278)."
        168. **^** Revkin, Andrew (8 June 2005). "Bush Aide Edited Climate Reports". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 3 August 2007.
        169. **^** Revkin, Andrew (10 June 2005). "Editor of Climate Report Resigns". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 23 April 2008.
        170. **^** Revkin, Andrew (15 June 2005). "Former Bush Aide Who Edited Reports Is Hired by Exxon". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 22 September 2017.
        171. **^** "Energy Secty Rick Perry: CO2 is not the main driver of climate change". 19 June 2017.
        172. **^** Seitter, Keith. "AMS Letter to Perry". American Meteorological Society.
        173. **^** Frej, Willa (18 May 2018). "Trump's NASA Chief Has Apparently Changed His Tune On Climate Change". Huffington Post. Retrieved 18 May 2018.
        174. **^** Justin Gillis; Leslie Kaufman (15 February 2012). "Leak Offers Glimpse of Campaign Against Climate Science". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 16 February 2012. "plans to promote a curriculum that would cast doubt on the scientific finding that fossil fuel emissions endanger the long-term welfare of the planet."
        175. **^** Stephanie Pappas; LiveScience (15 February 2012). "Leaked: Conservative Group Plans Anti-Climate Education Program". Scientific American. Retrieved 15 February 2012.
        176. **^** Suzanne Goldenberg (15 February 2012). "Heartland Institute claims fraud after leak of climate change documents". _The Guardian_. Retrieved 23 October 2014.
        177. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Branch, Glenn (5 June 2017). "The Heartbreak for Heartland Continues". _NCSE_. Retrieved 16 September 2017.
        178. **^** "Classroom Resources". _NCSE_. Retrieved 16 September 2017.
        179. **^** "Report Heartland Institute sent to influence US teachers on climate change earns an "F" from scientists". _ClimateFeedback.org_. 31 May 2017. Retrieved 16 September 2017.
        180. **^** Lever-Tracy 2010, p. 255: "In sum, we see that manufacturing uncertainty over climate change is the fundamental strategy of the denial machine […] As we reflect on the evolution of climate science and policy-making over the past few decades, we believe the denial machine has achieved considerable success – especially in the US but internationally as well. Public concern over global warming and support for climate policy-making in the US is low relative to other nations (see Chapter 10, this volume), contributing to inaction by the US government.
        181. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Corcoran, Terence (6 January 2010). "The cool down in climate polls". _Financial Post_. " Angus Reid surveyed people…before and after [the] Copenhagen [summit]. The drop off in public support for the idea that global warming is a fact mostly caused by human activity looks most pronounced in Canada. In November, 63% of Canadians supported global warming as a man-made phenomenon. By Dec. 23, that support had fallen 52%… A similar trend has been noted in the United States, where confidence in global warming theory has dropped to 46%… down from 51% in July last year. In Britain, only 43% believe man-made global warming is a fact, down from… 55% in July. In all three countries, there are signs of growing skepticism."[ _dead link_ ]
        182. **^** White, Rob (2012). _Climate Change from a Criminological Perspective_. Springer Science  & Business Media. ISBN 978-1-4614-3640-9. "belief that climate change is "real" and confidence in climate science has surprisingly decreased… Angus Reid polls conducted in December 2009 found declining support for climate change…in Britain, Canada, and the United States."
        183. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Rasmussen Reports (3 December 2009). Americans Skeptical of Science Behind Global Warming.
        184. **^** Rasmussen Reports. (6 February 2009). 54% Say Media Hype Global Warming Dangers.
        185. **^** Antilla 2005: "the popular press uses a number of methods to frame climate science as uncertain, including 'through the practice of interjecting and emphasizing controversy or disagreement among scientists'… In order to provide balance while reporting on climate change, some journalists include rebuttals by _experts_ who, often through think-tanks, are affiliated with the fossil fuel industry. Regrettably, this creates the impression that scientific opinion is evenly divided or completely unsettled"
        186. **^** Begley 2007: "polls found that 64 percent of Americans thought there was 'a lot' of scientific disagreement on climate change; only one third thought planetary warming was "mainly caused by things people do." In contrast, majorities in Europe and Japan recognize a broad consensus among climate experts"
        187. **^** Begley 2007: "A new NEWSWEEK Poll finds that the influence of the denial machine remains strong. Although the figure is less than in earlier polls, 39 percent of those asked say there is "a lot of disagreement among climate scientists" on the basic question of whether the planet is warming; 42 percent say there is a lot of disagreement that human activities are a major cause of global warming. Only 46 percent say the greenhouse effect is being felt today."
        188. **^** Holt, Rush (13 July 2007). "Trying to Get Us to Change Course" (film review.)". _Science_. **317** (5835): 198–9. doi:10.1126/science.1142810.
        189. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cook, John; et al. (15 May 2013). "Quantifying the consensus on anthropogenic global warming in the scientific literature". _Environmental Research Letters_. **8** (2): 024024. Bibcode:2013ERL.....8b4024C. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/2/024024. " there is a significant gap between public perception and reality, with 57% of the US public either disagreeing or unaware that scientists overwhelmingly agree that the earth is warming due to human activity (Pew 2012). Contributing to this "consensus gap" are campaigns designed to confuse the public about the level of agreement among climate scientists....The narrative presented by some dissenters is that the scientific consensus is "… on the point of collapse" while "… the number of scientific 'heretics' is growing with each passing year" A systematic, comprehensive review of the literature provides quantitative evidence countering this assertion. The number of papers rejecting AGW is a minuscule proportion of the published research, with the percentage slightly decreasing over time. Among papers expressing a position on AGW, an overwhelming percentage (97.2% based on self-ratings, 97.1% based on abstract ratings) endorses the scientific consensus on AGW."
        190. **^** Foster, Craig (2018). "Flat-Earth Anxieties Reflect Misplaced Priorities". _Skeptical Inquirer_. **42** (3): 10–11.
        191. **^** Graham Redfearn (7 January 2016). "Era of climate science denial is not over, study finds". _The Guardian_.
        192. **^** "Oil Company Positions on the Reality and Risk of Climate Change". _Environmental Studies_. University of Oshkosh—Wisconsin. Retrieved 27 March 2016.
        193. **^** Mark Boslough (20 October 2017). "An Interview with CSICon Speaker Michael Mann". Committee for Skeptical Inquiry.

## Bibliography

        
                  * Antilla, Liisa (2005). "Climate of scepticism: US newspaper coverage of the science of climate change". _Global Environmental Change_. **15** (4): 338–352. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.372.2033. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2005.08.003.
          * Begley, Sharon (13 August 2007). "The Truth About Denial". _Newsweek_. Archived from the original on 21 October 2007. (MSNBC single page version, archived 20 August 2007)
          * Björnberg, Karin Edvardsson; et al. (2017). "Climate and environmental science denial: A review of the scientific literature published in 1990-2015". _Journal of Cleaner Production_. **167** : 229–241. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.066.
          * Boslough, Mark (5 December 2014). "Deniers are not Skeptics". _Committee for Skeptical Inquiry_. Retrieved  7 July 2015.
          * Brown, R. G. E., Jr. (23 October 1996). "Environmental science under siege: Fringe science and the 104th Congress, U. S. House of Representatives" (PDF). _Report, Democratic Caucus of the Committee on Science_. Washington, D. C.: U. S. House of Representatives. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2007.
          * CBC News: the fifth estate (2007). "The Denial Machine". Archived from the original on 12 March 2007. Retrieved 29 July 2015.
          * Conway, Erik; Oreskes, Naomi (2010). _Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming_. USA: Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-59691-610-4.
          * Diethelm, Pascal; McKee, Martin (January 2009). "Denialism: what is it and how should scientists respond?" (PDF). _European Journal of Public Health_. **19** (1): 2–4. doi:10.1093/eurpub/ckn139. PMID 19158101.
          * Dunlap, Riley E; McCright, Aaron M. (2011). _Climate Change Denial: Sources, actors, and strategies_. Taylor  & Francis. ISBN 978-0-415-54478-8.
          * Dunlap, Riley E. (2013). "Climate Change Skepticism and Denial: An Introduction". _American Behavioral Scientist_. **57** (6): 691–698. doi:10.1177/0002764213477097. Retrieved  27 May 2015.
          * Dunlap, Riley E.; McCright, Aaron M. (2011). "Organised Climate Change Denial". In Dryzek, John S.; Norgaard, Richard B.; Schlosberg, David (eds.). _The Oxford Handbook of Climate Change and Society_. Oxford University Press. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-19-956660-0.
          * Dunlap, R. E.; Jacques, P. J. (2013). "Climate Change Denial Books and Conservative Think Tanks: Exploring the Connection". _American Behavioral Scientist_. **57** (6): 699–731. doi:10.1177/0002764213477096. PMC 3787818. PMID 24098056.
          * Gelbspan, Ross (December 1995). "The heat is on: The warming of the world's climate sparks a blaze of denial". Harper's Magazine. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved  2 June 2015.
          * Gelbspan, Ross (1 January 1997). _The Heat is on: The High Stakes Battle Over Earth's Threatened Climate_. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-201-13295-3.
          * Gelbspan, Ross (1998). _The heat is on : the climate crisis, the cover-up, the prescription_. Reading, Mass: Perseus Books. ISBN 978-0-7382-0025-5.
          * Hamilton, Clive (7 April 2011). _Requiem for a Species: Why We Resist the Truth about Climate Change_. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-84977-498-7.
          * Jacques, P.J.; Dunlap, Riley E.; Freeman, M. (2008). "The organisation of denial: Conservative think tanks and environmental scepticism". _Environmental Politics_. **17** (3): 349–385. doi:10.1080/09644010802055576.
          * Jenkins, Stephen H. (2015). _Tools for Critical Thinking in Biology_. Oxford University Press. pp. 229, 243. ISBN 9780199981045.
          * Kemp, Jeremy; Milne, Richard; Reay, Dave S. (2010). "Sceptics and deniers of climate change not to be confused". _Nature_. **464** (7289): 673. Bibcode:2010Natur.464..673K. doi:10.1038/464673a. PMID 20360714. Retrieved  7 September 2015.
          * Lever-Tracy, Constance (2010). _Routledge Handbook of Climate Change and Society_. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-203-87621-3.
          * Mooney, Chris (2005). _The Republican war on science_. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04675-1.
          * National Center for Science Education (5 January 2012). "Why Is It Called Denial?". _National Center for Science Education_. Retrieved  2 June 2015.
          * National Center for Science Education (4 June 2010). "Climate change is good science". _National Center for Science Education_. Retrieved  21 June 2015.
          * Nerlich, Brigitte (2010). "'Climategate': Paradoxical Metaphors and Political Paralysis". _Environmental Values_. **19** (4): 419–442. doi:10.3197/096327110x531543. Retrieved  4 July 2015.
          * Orlóci, L. (2008). "Vegetation displacement issues and transition statistics in climate warming cycle". _Community Ecology_. **9** (1): 83–98. doi:10.1556/comec.9.2008.1.10. Retrieved  29 July 2015.
          * Painter, James; Ashe, Teresa (2012). "Cross-national comparison of the presence of climate scepticism in the print media in six countries, 2007". _Environ. Res. Lett_. **7** (4): 044005. Bibcode:2012ERL.....7d4005P. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/7/4/044005. Retrieved  27 May 2015.
          * Powell, James Lawrence (1 December 2012). _The Inquisition of Climate Science_. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-15719-3.
          * Rennie, John (30 November 2009). "Seven Answers to Climate Contrarian Nonsense". _Scientific American_.
          * Timmer, John (16 December 2014). "Skeptics, deniers, and contrarians: The climate science label game". _Ars Technica_.
          * Vaidyanathan, Gayathri (2014). "What Have Climate Scientists Learned from 20-Year Fight with Deniers?". _Scientific American_.
          * Washington, Haydn (2013). _Climate Change Denial: Heads in the Sand_. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-53004-3.
          * Weart, Spencer R. (July 2007). "Roger Revelle's Discovery". _The Discovery of Global Warming_. American Institute of Physics. Retrieved  18 July 2015.
          * Weart, Spencer R. (February 2015). "The Public and Climate, cont". _The Discovery of Global Warming_. American Institute of Physics. Retrieved  2 June 2015.
          * Weart, Spencer R. (June 2015). "Government: The View from Washington, DC". _The Discovery of Global Warming_. American Institute of Physics. Retrieved  18 July 2015.
          * Weart, Spencer (2011). "Global warming: How skepticism became denial" (PDF). _Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists_. **67** (1): 41–50. doi:10.1177/0096340210392966. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2015.
        

## Further reading

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-

logo.svg/34px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) | Wikiquote has quotations related to:
_**Climate change denial**_  
---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Climate
change denial**_.  
---|---  
* Kathy Mulvey (January 2017). "Tillerson Refuses to Acknowledge ExxonMobil's Efforts to Deceive the Public on Climate Change" * Hausfather, Zeke (January 2017). No 'Pause' in Global Warming: Oceans Heating Up and Sea Levels Rising at Alarming Pace. "Details the findings of a new report that confirms NOAA data about climate change." * David Kaiser and Lee Wasserman (December 2016). "Part 1" and "Part 2," _New York Review of Books_ * "Frontline: Climate of Doubt". PBS. 23 October 2012. Retrieved 2012-10-25. * "Dealing in Doubt: The climate denial industry and climate science - a brief history of attacks on climate science, climate scientists and the IPCC". Greenpeace. 24 March 2010. Retrieved 22 September 2014. * Bowen, Mark (2008). Censoring Science: Dr. James Hansen and the Truth of Global Warming. Plume. ISBN 0-452-28962-9 * McCright, Aaron M.; Dunlap, Riley E. (2003). "Defeating Kyoto: The Conservative Movement's Impact on U.S. Climate Change Policy" (PDF). _Social Problems_. **50** (3): 348–373. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.189.3388. doi:10.1525/sp.2003.50.3.348. * Shearer, Christine (2011). "Kivalina: A Climate Change Story" Haymarket Books. ISBN 978-1-60846-128-8
        
                  * v
          * t
          * e
        

Global warming and climate change

* * *

|

Temperatures

* * *
        
                  * Brightness temperature
          * Effective temperature
          * Geologic record
          * Hiatus
          * Historical climatology
          * Instrumental record
          * Paleoclimatology
          * Paleotempestology
          * Proxy data
          * Record of the past 1,000 years
          * Satellite measurements
        

|

Causes

* * *

| Anthropogenic  
(caused by human activity)|

        
                  * Attribution of recent climate change
          * Aviation
          * Biofuel
          * Black carbon
          * Carbon dioxide
          * Deforestation
          * Earth's energy budget
          * Ecocide
          * Fossil fuel
          * Global dimming
          * Global warming potential
          * Greenhouse effect
          * (Infrared window)
          * Greenhouse gases
          * Land use, land-use change, and forestry
          * Radiative forcing
          * Tropospheric ozone
        

---|---  
Natural|

        
                  * Albedo
          * Bond events
          * Climate oscillations
          * Climate sensitivity
          * Cloud forcing
          * Cosmic rays
          * Feedbacks
          * Glaciation
          * Global cooling
          * Milankovitch cycles
          * Ocean variability
            * AMO
            * ENSO
            * IOD
            * PDO
          * Orbital forcing
          * Solar variation
          * Volcanism
        

Models|

        
                  * Global climate model
        

|

History

* * *
        
                  * History of climate change science
          * Atmospheric thermodynamics
          * Svante Arrhenius
          * James Hansen
          * Charles David Keeling
        

|

Opinion and climate change

* * *

| General|

        
                  * Environmental ethics
          * Media coverage of climate change
          * Public opinion on climate change
          * (Popular culture)
          * Scientific opinion on climate change
          * Scientists who disagree with the mainstream assessment
          * Climate change denial
          * Global warming conspiracy theory
        

---|---  
By country & region|

        
                  * Africa
          * Arctic
          * Argentina
          * Australia
          * Bangladesh
          * Belgium
          * Canada
          * China
          * Europe
          * European Union
          * Finland
          * Grenada
          * India
          * Japan
          * Luxembourg
          * New Zealand
          * Norway
          * Russia
          * Scotland
          * South Korea
          * Sweden
          * Tuvalu
          * United Kingdom
          * United States
        

|

Politics

* * *

|

        
                  * Clean Power Plan
          * Climate change denial
          * (Manufactured controversy)
          * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
          * March for Science
          * People's Climate March
          * United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC)
          * Global climate regime
        

* * *

|

Potential effects and issues

* * *

| General|

        
                  * Abrupt climate change
          * Anoxic event
          * Arctic dipole anomaly
          * Arctic haze
          * Arctic methane emissions
          * Central American dry corridor
          * Climate change and agriculture
          * Climate change and ecosystems
          * Climate change and gender
          * Climate change and poverty
          * Drought
          * Economics of global warming
          * Effects on plant biodiversity
          * Effects on health
          * Effects on humans
          * Effects on marine mammals
          * Environmental migrant
          * Extinction risk from global warming
          * Fisheries and climate change
          * Forest dieback
          * Industry and society
          * Iris hypothesis
          * Megadrought
          * Ocean acidification
          * Ozone depletion
          * Physical impacts
          * Polar stratospheric cloud
          * Regime shift
          * Retreat of glaciers since 1850
          * Runaway climate change
          * Sea level rise
          * Season creep
          * Shutdown of thermohaline circulation
          * Surf breaks and waves
        

---|---  
By country|

        
                  * Australia
          * South Asia
            * India
            * Nepal
          * United States
        

|

Mitigation

* * *

| Kyoto Protocol|

        
                  * Clean Development Mechanism
          * Joint Implementation
          * Bali Road Map
          * 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference
        

---|---  
Governmental|

        
                  * European Climate Change Programme
          * G8 Climate Change Roundtable
          * United Kingdom Climate Change Programme
          * Paris Agreement
            * United States withdrawal
          * Regional climate change initiatives in the United States
          * List of climate change initiatives
        

Emissions reduction|

        
                  * Carbon credit
          * Carbon-neutral fuel
          * Carbon offset
          * Carbon tax
          * Emissions trading
          * Fossil fuel phase-out
        

Carbon-free energy|

        
                  * Efficient energy use
          * Renewable energy
          * Low-carbon economy
          * Nuclear power
          * Carbon capture and storage
        

Personal|

        
                  * Individual action on climate change
          * Simple living
        

Other|

        
                  * Carbon dioxide removal
          * Carbon sink
          * Climate action
          * Climate Action Plan
          * Climate change mitigation scenarios
          * Climate engineering
          * Individual and political action on climate change
          * Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
          * Reforestation
          * Urban reforestation
        

|

Proposed adaptations

* * *

| Strategies|

        
                  * Damming glacial lakes
          * Desalination
          * Drought tolerance
          * Irrigation investment
          * Rainwater storage
          * Sustainable development
          * Weather modification
        

---|---  
Programmes|

        
                  * Land allocation decision support system
        
          * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Glossary
          * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Index
          * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Climate change
          * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Global warming
          * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal
        

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Climate_change_denial&oldid=898773903"

Categories:

        
                  * Climate change skepticism and denial
          * Conspiracy theories
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * Pages with citations lacking titles
          * Pages with citations having bare URLs
          * All articles with dead external links
          * Articles with dead external links from September 2017
          * Wikipedia introduction cleanup from May 2019
          * All pages needing cleanup
          * Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2019
          * All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify
          * Articles with short description
          * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
          * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
          * Use dmy dates from September 2018
          * Portal templates with redlinked portals
          * Commons category link is on Wikidata
          * Articles containing video clips
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * View source
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### In other projects

        
                  * Wikimedia Commons
          * Wikiquote
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * العربية
          * Čeština
          * Dansk
          * Deutsch
          * Español
          * فارسی
          * 한국어
          * עברית
          * Latina
          * 日本語
          * Norsk
          * Polski
          * Português
          * Русский
          * Slovenčina
          * Slovenščina
          * Svenska
          * ไทย
          * Українська
          * Tiếng Việt
          * 中文
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 25 May 2019, at 20:58 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

