

Asset 5arrow-downarrow-leftarrow-rightarrow-uparticleAsset 31Asset 2Asset
7Asset 6Asset 7Asset 15Asset 16cartAsset 51cart-filledAsset 52checkAsset
50Asset 3chevron-upchevron-leftchevron-rightchevron-upclosecomment-newcomment-
filledAsset 11double-caret-downdouble-chevron-downAsset 55double-chevron-
upAsset 56email-newemail-filledAsset 14Asset 2fullscreen-closefullscreen-
opengallerygallery-filledAsset 15GlobegridAsset 17grid-filledAsset
18headphones-newheadphones-filledAsset 19heart-filledheart-
openinteractiveAsset 73linkAsset 48loadingAsset 45Artboard 1minusmutedAsset
29muted-filledAsset 30ng-borderAsset 8pauseAsset 40pause-filledAsset 39Asset
12Asset 13playAsset 33play-filledAsset
32plusNG_AD_Iconography_111317_JY_v2Asset 3replayAsset 11Asset 10Asset
4SearchIconshareAsset 34facebookgithubArtboard 1Artboard
1linkedinlinkedin_inpinterestpinterest_psnapchatsnapchat_2twitterwhatsappspeakerAsset
27speaker-filledAsset 28star-filledstar-opentextAsset 43text-filledAsset
42tiltAsset 58Asset 8Asset 9Asset 4userAsset 53user-filledvideo-cameraAsset
35video-camera-filledAsset 36volumeAsset 25volume-filledAsset 26

![](/etc/designs/platform/v2/images/logos/ng-black-

logo.ngsversion.5ce5f96b.png)
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-
warming/deforestation.html

(C) 1996-2015 National Geographic Society, (C) 2015- 2019 National Geographic
Partners, LLC. All rights reserved

* * *

Reference

# Deforestation explained

## Human-driven and natural loss of trees—deforestation—affects wildlife,

ecosystems, weather patterns, and even the climate.

Climate 101: Deforestation

Forests cover about 30 percent of the planet's land mass, but humans are
cutting them down, clearing these essential habitats on a massive scale. What
is deforestation? Find out the causes, effects, and solutions.

Reference

# Deforestation explained

## Human-driven and natural loss of trees—deforestation—affects wildlife,

ecosystems, weather patterns, and even the climate.

Climate 101: Deforestation

Forests cover about 30 percent of the planet's land mass, but humans are
cutting them down, clearing these essential habitats on a massive scale. What
is deforestation? Find out the causes, effects, and solutions.

3 Minute Read

* * *

By **Christina Nunez**

* * *

PUBLISHED February 7, 2019

As the world seeks to slow the pace of climate change, preserve wildlife, and
support billions of people, trees inevitably hold a major part of the answer.
Yet the mass destruction of trees—deforestation—continues, sacrificing the
long-term benefits of standing trees for short-term gain.

Forests still cover about 30 percent of the world’s land area, but they are
disappearing at an alarming rate. Between 1990 and 2016, the world lost
502,000 square miles (1.3 million square kilometers) of forest, according to
the World Bank—an area larger than South Africa. Since humans started cutting
down forests, 46 percent of trees have been felled, according to a 2015 study
in the journal Nature. About 17 percent of the Amazonian rainforest has been
destroyed over the past 50 years, and losses recently have been on the rise.

We need trees for a variety of reasons, not least of which is that they absorb
not only the carbon dioxide that we exhale, but also the heat-trapping
greenhouse gases that human activities emit. As those gases enter the
atmosphere, global warming increases, a trend scientists now prefer to call
climate change. Tropical tree cover alone can provide 23 percent of the
climate mitigation needed over the next decade to meet goals set in the Paris
Agreement in 2015, according to one estimate.

## **Causes of deforestation**

Farming, grazing of livestock, mining, and drilling combined account for more
than half of all deforestation. Forestry practices, wildfires and, in small
part, urbanization account for the rest. In Malaysia and Indonesia, forests
are cut down to make way for producing palm oil, which can be found in
everything from shampoo to saltines. In the Amazon, cattle ranching and
farms—particularly soy plantations—are key culprits.

Logging operations, which provide the world’s wood and paper products, also
fell countless trees each year. Loggers, some of them acting illegally, also
build roads to access more and more remote forests—which leads to further
deforestation. Forests are also cut as a result of growing urban sprawl as
land is developed for homes.

Not all deforestation is intentional. Some is caused by a combination of human
and natural factors like wildfires and overgrazing, which may prevent the
growth of young trees.

## **Why it matters and what can be done**

Deforestation affects the people and animals where trees are cut, as well as
the wider world. Some 250 million people living in forest and savannah areas
depend on them for subsistence and income—many of them among the world’s rural
poor. Eighty percent of Earth’s land animals and plants live in forests, and
deforestation threatens species including the orangutan, Sumatran tiger, and
many species of birds. Removing trees deprives the forest of portions of its
canopy, which blocks the sun’s rays during the day and retains heat at night.
That disruption leads to more extreme temperature swings that can be harmful
to plants and animals.

Yet the effects of deforestation reach much farther. The South American
rainforest, for example, influences regional and perhaps even global water
cycles, and it's key to the water supply in Brazilian cities and neighboring
countries. The Amazon actually helps furnish water to some of the soy farmers
and beef ranchers who are clearing the forest. The loss of clean water and
biodiversity from all forests could have many other effects we can’t foresee,
touching even your morning cup of coffee.

In terms of climate change, cutting trees both adds carbon dioxide to the air
and removes the ability to absorb existing carbon dioxide. If tropical
deforestation were a country, according to the World Resources Institute, it
would rank third in carbon dioxide-equivalent emissions, behind China and the
U.S.

Can Cell Phones Help Save Rain Forests? This Tribe Thinks So.

Find out how a tribe in the Amazon is using old cell phones and machine
learning to help save their forest home.

The numbers are grim, but many conservationists see reasons for hope. A
movement is under way to preserve existing forest ecosystems and restore lost
tree cover. Organizations and activists are working to fight illegal mining
and logging—National Geographic Explorer Topher White, for example, has come
up with a way to use recycled cell phones to monitor for chainsaws. In
Tanzania, the residents of Kokota have planted more than 2 million trees on
their small island over a decade, aiming to repair previous damage. And in
Brazil, conservationists are rallying in the face of ominous signals that the
government may roll back forest protections.

For consumers, it makes sense to examine the products and meats you buy,
looking for sustainably produced sources when you can. Nonprofit groups such
as the Forest Stewardship Council and the Rainforest Alliance certify products
they consider sustainable, while the World Wildlife Fund has a palm oil
scorecard for consumer brands.

> See all of National Geographic's videos on deforestation here.

Continue Reading

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet *[cf]: confer

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer

