

# Development of the human body

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

"Developmental" redirects here. For other uses, see Development.

## Part of a series on

Human growth  
and development  
![Views of a Foetus in the Womb

detail.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2a/Views_of_a_Foetus_in_the_Womb_detail.jpg/100px-

Views_of_a_Foetus_in_the_Womb_detail.jpg)  
Stages

  * Zygote
  * Embryo
  * Fetus 

  * Infant

  * Toddler 

  * Child

  * Preadolescent
  * Adolescent 

  * Young adult

  * Middle adult
  * Old adult

Biological milestones

  * Fertilization
  * Pregnancy
  * Childbirth
  * Walking
  * Language acquisition
  * Puberty
  * Menopause
  * Ageing
  * Death

Development and psychology

  * Pre- and perinatal
  * Infant and child
  * Adolescent
  * Youth
  * Young adult
  * Adult
  * Maturity

Developmental stage theories

  * Attachment
  * Ecological
  * Psychosocial
  * Psychosexual development
  * Moral
  * Cognitive
  * Cultural-historical
  * Evolutionary

  * ![Psi2.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6c/Psi2.svg/16px-Psi2.svg.png) Psychology portal

  * v

  * t
  * e

**Human development** is the process of growth to maturity. The process begins
with fertilisation, where an egg released from the ovary of a female is
penetrated by a sperm cell from a male. The egg then lodges in the uterus,
where an embryo and later fetus develop until birth. Further growth and
development continues after birth, and includes both physical and
psychological development, influenced by genetic, hormonal, environmental and
other factors. This continues throughout life, through childhood, and
adolescence into adulthood.

## Contents

  * 1 Before birth
    * 1.1 Fertilization
    * 1.2 Embryonic development
    * 1.3 Fetal development
    * 1.4 Maternal influences
  * 2 After birth
    * 2.1 Infancy and childhood
    * 2.2 Puberty
    * 2.3 Adulthood
  * 3 Organ systems
  * 4 Clinical significance
    * 4.1 Measuring growth
    * 4.2 Abnormal growth
  * 5 Additional images
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References

## Before birth[edit]

Main articles: Human embryogenesis and Prenatal development

Development before birth, or **prenatal development** (from Latin _natalis_ ,
meaning 'relating to birth') is the process in which a zygote, and later an
embryo and then a fetus develops during gestation. Prenatal development starts
with fertilization and the formation of the zygote, the first stage in
embryogenesis which continues in fetal development until birth.

### Fertilization[edit]

Main article: Human fertilization

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/86/Sperm-egg.jpg/220px-

Sperm-egg.jpg)

Sperm fertilizing an egg

Fertilization occurs when the sperm successfully enters the ovum's membrane.
The chromosomes of the sperm combine with those of the egg to form a single
cell, called a zygote, and the germinal stage of embryogenesis commences.[1]
The germinal stage refers to the time from fertilization, through the
development of the early embryo, up until implantation. The germinal stage is
over at about 10 days of gestation.[2]

The zygote contains a full complement of genetic material, with all the
biological characteristics of a single and unrepeatable human being, and
develops into the embryo. Briefly, embryonic development have four stages: the
morula stage, the blastula stage, the gastrula stage, and the neurula stage.
Prior to implantation, the embryo remains in a protein shell, the zona
pellucida, and undergoes a series of cell divisions, called mitosis. A week
after fertilization the embryo still has not grown in size, but hatches from
the zona pellucida and adheres to the lining of the mother's uterus. This
induces a decidual reaction, wherein the uterine cells proliferate and
surround the embryo thus causing it to become embedded within the uterine
tissue. The embryo, meanwhile, proliferates and develops both into embryonic
and extra-embryonic tissue, the latter forming the fetal membranes and the
placenta. In humans, the embryo is referred to as a fetus in the later stages
of prenatal development. The transition from embryo to fetus is arbitrarily
defined as occurring 8 weeks after fertilization. In comparison to the embryo,
the fetus has more recognizable external features and a set of progressively
developing internal organs. A nearly identical process occurs in other
species.

### Embryonic development[edit]

Main article: Human embryogenesis

Human embryogenesis refers to the development and formation of the human
embryo. It is characterised by the process of cell division and cellular
differentiation of the embryo that occurs during the early stages of
development. In biological terms, human development entails growth from a one-
celled zygote to an adult human being. Fertilisation occurs when the sperm
cell successfully enters and fuses with an egg cell (ovum). The genetic
material of the sperm and egg then combine to form a single cell called a
zygote and the germinal stage of prenatal development commences.[1]
Embryogenesis covers the first eight weeks of development; at the beginning of
the ninth week the embryo is termed a fetus.

The germinal stage refers to the time from fertilization through the
development of the early embryo until implantation is completed in the uterus.
The germinal stage takes around 10 days.[3] During this stage, the zygote
begins to divide, in a process called cleavage. A blastocyst is then formed
and implanted in the uterus. Embryogenesis continues with the next stage of
gastrulation, when the three germ layers of the embryo form in a process
called histogenesis, and the processes of neurulation and organogenesis
follow.

In comparison to the embryo, the fetus has more recognizable external features
and a more complete set of developing organs. The entire process of
embryogenesis involves coordinated spatial and temporal changes in gene
expression, cell growth and cellular differentiation. A nearly identical
process occurs in other species, especially among chordates.

### Fetal development[edit]

Main article: Fetus

A **fetus** is a stage in the human development considered to begin nine weeks
after fertilization.[4][5] In biological terms, however, prenatal development
is a continuum, with many defining feature distinguishing an embryo from a
fetus. A fetus is also characterized by the presence of all the major body
organs, though they will not yet be fully developed and functional and some
not yet situated in their final location.

### Maternal influences[edit]

See also: Placenta

The fetus and embryo develop within the uterus, an organ that sits within the
pelvis of the mother. The process the mother experiences whilst carrying the
fetus or embryo is referred to as pregnancy. The placenta connects the
developing fetus to the uterine wall to allow nutrient uptake, thermo-
regulation, waste elimination, and gas exchange via the mother's blood supply;
to fight against internal infection; and to produce hormones which support
pregnancy. The placenta provides oxygen and nutrients to growing fetuses and
removes waste products from the fetus's blood. The placenta attaches to the
wall of the uterus, and the fetus's umbilical cord develops from the placenta.
These organs connect the mother and the fetus. Placentas are a defining
characteristic of placental mammals, but are also found in marsupials and some
non-mammals with varying levels of development.[6] The homology of such
structures in various viviparous organisms is debatable, and in invertebrates
such as Arthropoda, is analogous at best.

## After birth[edit]

### Infancy and childhood[edit]

Main articles: Infant, Child development, and Child development stages

**Childhood** is the age span ranging from birth to adolescence.[7] In
developmental psychology, childhood is divided up into the developmental
stages of toddlerhood (learning to walk), early childhood (play age), middle
childhood (school age), and adolescence (puberty through post-puberty).
Various childhood factors could affect a person's attitude formation. **[7]**

  * Prepubescence 
    * Neonate (newborn)
    * Infant (baby)
    * Toddler
    * Play age
    * Elementary school age, may coincide with preadolescence

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9e/Child_development_stages.svg/800px-

Child_development_stages.svg.png)

Approximate outline of development periods in child development.

The Tanner stages can be used to approximately judge a child's age based on
physical development.

For North American, Indo-Iranian (India, Iran) and European girls | For North
American, Indo-Iranian (India, Iran) and European boys  
---|--- 

  * Thelarche (breast development) 11y (8y–13y)
  * Pubarche (pubic hair) 11y (8.5y–13.5y)
  * Growth spurt 11.25y (10y–12.5y)
  * Menarche (first menstrual bleeding) 12.5y (10.5y–14.5y)
  * Wisdom tooth eruption 15y (14y-17y)
  * Adult height reached 15y (14y–17y)

|

  * Gonadarche (testicular enlargement) 12y (10y–14y)
  * Pubarche (pubic hair) 12y (10y–14y)
  * Growth spurt 13y (11y–18.5y)
  * Spermarche (first ejaculation) 13.5y (11.5y–15.5y)
  * Wisdom tooth eruption 17y (15y-19y)
  * Completion of growth 17y (15y–19y)

### Puberty[edit]

Main article: Puberty

**Puberty** is the process of physical changes through which a child's body
matures into an adult body capable of sexual reproduction. It is initiated by
hormonal signals from the brain to the gonads: the ovaries in a girl, the
testes in a boy. In response to the signals, the gonads produce hormones that
stimulate libido and the growth, function, and transformation of the brain,
bones, muscle, blood, skin, hair, breasts, and sex organs. Physical
growth—height and weight—accelerates in the first half of puberty and is
completed when an adult body has been developed. Until the maturation of their
reproductive capabilities, the pre-pubertal physical differences between boys
and girls are the external sex organs.

On average, girls begin puberty around ages 10–11 and end puberty around
15–17; boys begin around ages 11–12 and end around 16–17.[8][9][10][11][12]
The major landmark of puberty for females is menarche, the onset of
menstruation, which occurs on average between ages 12 and 13;[13][14][15][16]
for males, it is the first ejaculation, which occurs on average at age 13.[17]
In the 21st century, the average age at which children, especially girls,
reach puberty is lower compared to the 19th century, when it was 15 for girls
and 16 for boys.[18] This can be due to any number of factors, including
improved nutrition resulting in rapid body growth, increased weight and fat
deposition,[19] or exposure to endocrine disruptors such as xenoestrogens,
which can at times be due to food consumption or other environmental
factors.[20][21] Puberty which starts earlier than usual is known as
precocious puberty, and puberty which starts later than usual is known as
delayed puberty.

Notable among the morphologic changes in size, shape, composition, and
functioning of the pubertal body, is the development of secondary sex
characteristics, the "filling in" of the child's body; from girl to woman,
from boy to man.

### Adulthood[edit]

In accordance with general definitions of adulthood (such as the Collins
English Dictionary), biologically, an **adult** is a human or other organism
that has reached skeleto-muscular and neural maturity; processes which have
been proven to last until the mid-twenties which refer to the development of
an individual's musculature, skeletal structure, and various parts of the
brain, namely the frontal lobe, with the median age range being 25-28. In
human context, the term _adult_ additionally has meanings associated with
social and legal concepts. In contrast to a "minor", a **legal adult** or a
'legal major' is a person who has attained the age of majority and is
therefore given full independence in decision making with full support of the
law; as able to be independent, self-sufficient, and responsible. The typical
age of attaining adulthood is 18, although definition may vary by legal rights
and country.

Human adulthood encompasses psychological adult development. Definitions of
adulthood are often inconsistent and contradictory; a person may have adult
behavior but still be treated as a child if they are under the legal age of
majority. Conversely, one may legally be an adult but possess none of the
maturity and responsibility that may define an adult, as most countries' age
of majority falls under the age of biological maturity which initself varies
from individual to individual and continues to develop until the mid-twenties,
with emphasis put on the brain which is responsible for the various qualities
generally linked to adult behavior such as attention, executive ability and
risk assessment.

## Organ systems[edit]

![\[icon\]](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1c/Wiki_letter_w_cropped.svg/20px-

Wiki_letter_w_cropped.svg.png)|

This section **needs expansion**. You can help by adding to it. _( April
2019)_

---|---  
This article is part of a series on the  
---  
Development of organ systems  
Nervous system  
Digestive system  
Reproductive system  
Urinary system  
Endocrine system  
Human development  
Circulatory system

  * v
  * t
  * e

Development of human organs and organ systems begins in the embryo and
continues throughout the human lifespan.

## Clinical significance[edit]

![\[icon\]](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1c/Wiki_letter_w_cropped.svg/20px-

Wiki_letter_w_cropped.svg.png)|

This section **needs expansion**. You can help by adding to it. _( April
2019)_

---|--- 

### Measuring growth[edit]

### Abnormal growth[edit]

## Additional images[edit]

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/57/Prenatal_development_table.svg/120px-Prenatal_development_table.svg.png)

Stages in prenatal development.

## See also[edit]

  * Auxology
  * Developmental biology
  * Life-history theory

## References[edit]

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Sherk, Stephanie Dionne. "Prenatal Development". _Gale Encyclopedia of Children's Health, 2006_. Gale. Archived from the original on 1 December 2013. Retrieved 6 October 2013.
  2. **^** "germinal stage". _Mosby's Medical Dictionary, 8th edition_. Elsevier. Retrieved 6 October 2013.
  3. **^** "germinal stage". _Mosby's Medical Dictionary, 8th edition_. Elsevier. Retrieved 6 October 2013.
  4. **^** Klossner, N. Jayne, Introductory Maternity Nursing (2005): "The fetal stage is from the beginning of the 9th week after fertilization and continues until birth"
  5. **^** "First Trimester - American Pregnancy Association". _americanpregnancy.org_. 1 May 2012. Archived from the original on 23 April 2009.
  6. **^** Pough _et al._ 1992. Herpetology: Third Edition. Pearson Prentice Hall:Pearson Education, Inc., 2002.
  7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Macmillan Dictionary for Students_ Macmillan, Pan Ltd. (1981), page 173. Retrieved 2010-7-15.
  8. **^** Kail, RV; Cavanaugh JC (2010). _Human Development: A Lifespan View_ (5th ed.). Cengage Learning. p. 296. ISBN 0495600377. Retrieved September 11, 2014.
  9. **^** "For girls, puberty begins around 10 or 11 years of age and ends around age 16. Boys enter puberty later than girls-usually around 12 years of age-and it lasts until around age 16 or 17." "Teenage Growth  & Development: 11 to 14 Years". Palo Alto Medical Foundation/pamf.org. Retrieved 2013-11-09.
  10. **^** "Teenage Growth  & Development: 15 to 17 Years". Palo Alto Medical Foundation/pamf.org. Retrieved 2013-11-09.
  11. **^** "Puberty and adolescence". University of Maryland. Retrieved July 5, 2009.
  12. **^** Marshall (1986), pp. 176–177
  13. **^** (Tanner, 1990).
  14. **^** Anderson SE, Dallal GE, Must A (April 2003). "Relative weight and race influence average age at menarche: results from two nationally representative surveys of US girls studied 25 years apart". _Pediatrics_. **111** (4 Pt 1): 844–850. doi:10.1542/peds.111.4.844. PMID 12671122.
  15. **^** Al-Sahab B, Ardern CI, Hamadeh MJ, Tamim H (2010). "Age at menarche in Canada: results from the National Longitudinal Survey of Children  & Youth". _BMC Public Health_. BMC Public Health. **10** : 736. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-10-736. PMC 3001737. PMID 21110899.
  16. **^** Hamilton-Fairley, Diana. "Obstetrics and Gynaecology" (PDF) (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishing. Retrieved 2013-11-09.
  17. **^** (Jorgensen  & Keiding 1991).
  18. **^** Alleyne, Richard (2010-06-13). "Girls now reaching puberty before 10—a year sooner than 20 years ago". _The Daily Telegraph_. London.
  19. **^** Guillette EA, Conard C, Lares F, Aguilar MG, McLachlan J, Guillette LJ (March 2006). "Altered breast development in young girls from an agricultural environment". _Environ. Health Perspect_. **114** (3): 471–5. doi:10.1289/ehp.8280. PMC 1392245. PMID 16507474.
  20. **^** Buck Louis GM, Gray LE, Marcus M, Ojeda SR, Pescovitz OH, Witchel SF, Sippell W, Abbott DH, Soto A, Tyl RW, Bourguignon JP, Skakkebaek NE, Swan SH, Golub MS, Wabitsch M, Toppari J, Euling SY (February 2008). "Environmental factors and puberty timing: expert panel research needs". _Pediatrics_. 121 Suppl 3: S192–207. doi:10.1542/peds.1813E. PMID 18245512.
  21. **^** Mouritsen A, Aksglaede L, Sørensen K, Mogensen SS, Leffers H, Main KM, Frederiksen H, Andersson AM, Skakkebaek NE, Juul A (April 2010). "Hypothesis: exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals may interfere with timing of puberty". _Int. J. Androl_. **33** (2): 346–59. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2605.2010.01051.x. PMID 20487042.

  22. v

  23. t
  24. e

Human embryogenesis in the first three weeks

* * *

Week 1|

  * Fertilization
  * Oocyte activation
  * Zygote
  * Cleavage
  * Blastomere
  * Morula
  * Blastocoele
  * Blastocyst
  * Inner cell mass
  * Trophoblast

Week 2  
(Bilaminar)|

  * Hypoblast
  * Epiblast

Week 3  
(Trilaminar)|

| Germ layers|

  * Archenteron/Primitive streak
    * Primitive pit
    * Primitive knot/Blastopore
    * Primitive groove
  * Gastrula
    * Gastrulation
  * Regional specification
  * Embryonic disc

---|---  
Ectoderm|

  * Surface ectoderm
  * Neuroectoderm
  * Somatopleuric mesenchyme
  * Neurulation
  * Neural crest

Endoderm|

  * Splanchnopleuric mesenchyme

Mesoderm|

  * Axial mesoderm
  * Paraxial
    * Somite
    * Somitomere
  * Intermediate
  * Lateral plate

    * Intraembryonic coelom
    * Splanchnopleuric mesenchyme
    * Somatopleuric mesenchyme
  * v

  * t
  * e

Development of the human body

* * *

Before birth|

  * Development
  * Embryo
  * Fetus
  * Gestational age

Birth and after|

  * Birth
  * Child development
    * stages
    * Puberty
  * Adult development
  * Ageing
  * Senescence
  * Death

Phases|

  * Infant
  * Toddler
  * Early childhood
  * Childhood
    * Child
  * Preadolescence
  * Adolescence
  * Adulthood
  * Middle age
  * Old age

Social and legal|

  * Minor
  * Age of majority

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Development_of_the_human_body&oldid=899902514"

Categories:

  * Human development
  * Human biology
  * Developmental psychology

Hidden categories:

  * CS1: long volume value
  * Articles to be expanded from April 2019
  * All articles to be expanded
  * Articles using small message boxes

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Asturianu
  * Bosanski
  * Čeština
  * Español
  * فارسی
  * Français
  * Galego
  * हिन्दी
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * Қазақша
  * Kiswahili
  * Nederlands
  * नेपाल भाषा
  * Polski
  * Русский
  * Српски / srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
  * தமிழ்
  * Українська
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 2 June 2019, at 03:52 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

