
                
                                      * News
                      * NBC News NOW
                      * Nightly News
                      * Meet the Press
                      * Dateline
                      * MSNBC
                      * TODAY
                
                      * #Pride50
                      * Politics
                      * U.S. News
                      * Business
                      * World
                      * Tech & Media
                      * THINK
                      * Sports
                

##

                
                                      * Share this --
                      *           *           *           *           * Search
                

### Sections

                
                                      * U.S. News
                      * Politics
                      * World
                      * Local
                      * Business
                      * Health
                      * Investigations
                      * Culture Matters
                      * Science
                      * Sports
                      * Tech & Media
                      * Trump Effect
                      * In Focus
                      * Russia Investigation
                      * Photos
                      * Weather
                

### TV

                
                                      * Today
                      * MSNBC
                      * Nightly News
                      * Meet The Press
                      * Dateline
                

### Featured

                
                                      * NBC NEWS NOW
                      * THINK
                      * MACH
                      * BETTER
                      * NIGHTLY FILMS
                      * NBC LEFT FIELD
                      * ASIAN AMERICA
                      * NBC LATINO
                      * NBCBLK
                      * NBC OUT
                      * STAY TUNED
                      * SPECIAL FEATURES
                

### More from NBC

                
                                      * CNBC
                      * NBC.COM
                      * NBC LEARN
                      * Peacock Productions
                      * Next Steps for Vets
                      * Parent Toolkit
                      * NBC Archives
                      * Know Your Value
                

### Follow NBC News

                
                                      *           *           * Search
                
                      * Facebook
                      * Twitter
                      * Email
                      * SMS
                      * Print
                      * Whatsapp
                      * Reddit
                      * Pocket
                      * Flipboard
                      * Pinterest
                      * Linkedin
                

## Meet the Press

# Polling: Consensus emerges in climate change debate

If you expect those changing views to lead to action in Washington, however,
think again.

## Most Americans agree on climate change, but there's still a serious

political divide

Dec. 21, 201802:02

## Breaking News Emails

Get breaking news alerts and special reports. The news and stories that
matter, delivered weekday mornings.

SUBSCRIBE

Dec. 30, 2018, 2:07 PM UTC

By Dante Chinni and Sally Bronston

WASHINGTON — The climate change debate has been a part of politics in
Washington for decades now, but polling from 2018 shows that there may be a
consensus emerging from the American public. A range of surveys show more
people believe it is happening and more people believe humans are responsible.

If you expect those changing views to lead to action in Washington, however,
think again. In the places where it counts, where laws and regulations are
made, the feelings concerning what should be done about climate change are
much more divided.

On the most basic level, there is big agreement that climate change is a real
thing and is happening before our eyes, according to a massive survey from the
Yale Program on Climate Change Communication and the George Mason Center for
Climate Change Communication.

That data showed 70 percent of Americans believe “global warming is happening”
and 57 percent believe “global warming is being caused mostly by human
activities.”

That data showed 70 percent of Americans believe “global warming is happening”
and 57 percent believe “global warming is being caused mostly by human
activities.” In a nation as divided as the United States is right now, those
are remarkable numbers.

The American Communities Project went further and analyzed those data through
its set of 15 different community types and found similar numbers. Large
majorities in all types believe climate change is real and majorities in most
communities believing humans are mostly causing the changes.

The latest NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll provides more evidence of a
climate change majority.

The latest NBC News/ Wall Street Journal poll provides more evidence of a
climate change majority.

Two-thirds of those surveyed say they believe climate change is a serious
problem and the nation needs to take action. That number is up 15 percentage
points from 1999. At the same time, only 30 percent say we don’t know enough
yet or that we don’t need to be concerned. That figure is down 13 points from
1999. That’s real movement.

And even more extraordinary in the poll is how uniform the numbers are the
groups that believe climate change is a serious problem.

Even more extraordinary in the poll is how uniform the numbers are the groups
that believe climate change is a serious problem.

Across a range of races and ethnicities there is widespread agreement. More
than 60 percent of whites, Hispanics and African-Americans believe more needs
to be done. And even the urban/rural divide largely disappears on the issue.
More than 50 percent of those who live in cities, suburbs and rural locations
agree that action is needed.

So with all that agreement, Washington is sure to make climate change a top
priority, right? That’s where things get more complicated. The one area where
we still see a big disagreement is between the nation’s two major political
parties.

The one area where we still see a big disagreement is between the nation's two
major political parties.

Among Democrats, 71 percent say climate change is an urgent problem. That is a
42-point increase since 1999. For independent voters, 47 percent say they want
action taken on climate change, a figure that is up 22 points since 1999.

But the number is much lower for Republicans; only 15 percent see a pressing
need to deal with the issue. More noteworthy than the difference, however, is
the stability of the Republican figure. That 15 percent mark is unchanged
since the same question was asked in 1999.

And even with all the movement and the apparent agreement in these numbers,
the unchanging nature of that partisan split is arguably the most crucial in
terms of national policy.

There are more than 300 million people in the United States, but politically
speaking there are two major parties and on the issues of whether and how to
deal with climate change they have decidedly different views.

Public opinion in one thing, but as long as those party differences persist,
movement on the issue is likely going to be hard to come by in Washington.

                
                                      * About
                      * Contact
                      * Careers
                      * Privacy policy
                      * Terms of Service
                      * NBCNews.COM Site Map
                      * Advertise
                      * AdChoices
                

(C) 2019 NBC UNIVERSAL

                
                                      *           *           *
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

