

![](/content/dam/redcross/imported-images/redcross-logo.png.img.png) __Menu

__

                
                                      * Hi,  Account Summary Donation History Personal Information Sign Out
                      * Sign In 
                      * Español 
                      * Your Local Red Cross
                

Based on Zip Code Change

Visit local site Find other locations

                
                                      * __Shop the Red Cross Store
                

![](/content/dam/redcross/imported-images/redcross-logo.png.img.png)

Donate

                
                                      * Ways to Donate Money
                        * Donate Online
                        * Monthly Gifts
                        * Text, Mail, Or Phone
                        * Fundraising Ideas
                        * Major Gifts
                        * Tribute Giving
                      * Where Your Money Goes
                        * Your Gift Matters
                        * Home Fire Campaign
                        * Current Relief Efforts
                      * Companies & Foundations
                        * Get Started
                        * Partnership Opportunities
                        * Our Corporate Partners
                        * Other Ways to Give
                        * Partners: Why We Give
                

![](/content/dam/redcross/megamenu-assets/home-fire-donate-nav-

promo-255x217-gradient.png.img.png) Support Home Fire Relief »

Give Blood

                
                                      * How to Donate
                        * Find a Blood Drive
                        * Eligibility Requirements
                        * Types of Blood Donations
                        * How Blood Donations Help
                        * Common Concerns
                      * Blood Donation Process
                        * Donation Process Overview
                        * What to do Before, During and After
                        * What Happens to Donated Blood
                        * First Time Blood Donors
                      * Learn About Hosting
                        * Why Host a Blood Drive?
                        * How Hosting a Blood Drive Works
                        * Hosting a Blood Drive FAQ
                        * Apply to Host a Blood Drive
                

![Schedule a Blood Donation](/content/dam/redcrossblood/rcb/home-

page/components/Emergency-Need-Donate-Nav.jpg.img.jpeg)

Training & Certification

                
                                      * Find Classes & Certification
                        * First Aid
                        * CPR
                        * AED
                        * Healthcare BLS
                        * Babysitting & Child Care
                        * Swimming & Water Safety
                        * Lifeguarding
                        * CNA Training
                        * CNA Testing
                        * Instructor Training
                        * Train My Employees
                      * Shop Supplies & Products
                        * Training Supplies
                        * Books & DVDs
                        * Lifeguarding & Learn to Swim
                        * Emergency Preparedness
                        * First Aid Supplies
                        * Apparel & Accessories
                

Volunteer

                
                                        * Become a Volunteer
                        * Volunteer Opportunities
                        * Volunteer to Sound the Alarm
                        * Sign In to Volunteer Connection
                

About Us

                
                                      * Our Work
                        * Disaster Relief
                        * Lifesaving Blood
                        * Training & Certification
                        * Military Families
                        * International Services
                      * Who We Are
                        * Mission & Values
                        * Leadership
                        * Governance
                        * History
                        * Nursing & Health
                        * Red Cross Stories
                        * Celebrity Supporters
                      * News & Events
                        * Latest News
                        * Publications
                        * Media Resources
                        * Connect with Us
                      * Careers
                        * Career Opportunities
                        * Culture & Values
                        * Benefits
                        * University Programs
                

Get Help

                
                                      * Disaster Relief & Recovery Services
                        * Find an Open Shelter
                        * Contact & Locate Loved Ones
                        * Hurricane Florence Financial Assistance
                        * Hurricane Michael Financial Assistance
                        * 2018 CA Wildfires Financial Assistance
                      * How to Prepare for Emergencies
                        * Workplaces & Organizations
                        * Emergency Preparedness for Kids
                        * Types of Emergencies
                        * Mobile Apps
                      * Military Families
                        * Emergency Communication
                        * Financial Assistance
                        * Deployment
                        * Information & Referral
                        * Services for Veterans
                

![](/content/dam/redcross/megamenu-assets/water-safety-nav-

promo-255x217.png.img.png) Water Safety Tips »

Home

Volunteer Opportunities

# Volunteer Internationally

__

![](/content/dam/redcross/Disaster-Cycle-Services/volunteer-

international.jpg.transform/1288/q70/feature/image.jpeg)

## Volunteer Internationally

## Volunteer Internationally

##### **Local Actions Have International Impact**

The American Red Cross responds to international disasters by sending
financial assistance, pre-positioned relief supplies from our global
warehouses, trained emergency response personnel, or any combination of the
three.

Not all disasters overseas require our assistance. Even large disasters that
dominate the news can often be managed by that country’s Red Cross or Red
Crescent organization. For example, Indonesia experiences frequent intense
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions; as a result, the Indonesian Red Cross has
the experience and capacity to handle most of their disaster operations
without outside support. Local Red Cross organizations only request assistance
when a disaster exceeds their capacity to respond.

And the Red Cross help is not limited to disaster relief; we do other types of
humanitarian work with a global impact as well. There are many opportunities
for you to get involved, through donating, taking or teaching a class, or
volunteering.

##### **Make a Donation**

**Support International Disaster Relief**

The most common way the American Red Cross supports international emergencies
is through financial assistance, which is why making a financial donation is
the most effective way you can support our international responses. Cash
enables the local Red Cross organization in the affected country to identify
and address the most immediate needs—such as providing food and water or
repairing damaged homes. When used to purchase relief supplies, cash reduces
the time and cost of delivery to affected populations. It also stimulates the
local economy, which is often undermined by a disaster.

**Support the Measles Initiative**

This program has vaccinated more than 1 billion children worldwide,
contributing to a 78% decline in measles deaths in its first eight years. You
can make a $10 donation to support this effort by texting PREVENT to 90999
(see the terms and conditions) or visit MeaslesInitiative.org learn more about
what we do and how you can help vaccinate an entire village with support from
your friends, family, and community.

##### **Take, Teach or Host a Class**

**International Humanitarian Law**

The Red Cross is dedicated to educating people about and raising awareness of
International Humanitarian Law. You can participate as a student or volunteer
instructor.

##### **Volunteer**

**Restoring Family Links**

As a volunteer for the Red Cross you can help people living overseas who have
been displaced by war or disaster reconnect with family members living in your
community. These volunteer opportunities, like most with the Red Cross
volunteer opportunities, are arranged through your local Red Cross. You can
find your local Red Cross via a link at the top of each page of this website.
For more information on volunteer opportunities, please visit Volunteering.

**International Disaster Responders**

Although many international disasters are managed and staffed by people living
in the affected communities, the American Red Cross remains ready to respond
when needed. Volunteers with exceptional technical skills, Red Cross knowledge
and disaster relief experience (which often comes from volunteering with a
local Red Cross chapter) can apply to become part of our international
disaster response roster. These responders are deployed worldwide in a variety
of capacities alongside local Red Cross organizations, the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Learn more about becoming an international
disaster responder.

![International Services - Nepal

Earthquake](/content/dam/redcross/International-Services/Earthquakes/about-

international-nepal.jpg.img.jpeg)

##### Nepal Earthquake »

Learn more about our work with communities affected by the recent earthquakes
in Nepal.

#### Related Links

                
                                      * International Humanitarian Law
                
                      * Volunteering
                
                      * Learn More about the Haiti Assistance Program
                

__

Donate Now

Support all the urgent humanitarian needs of the American Red Cross.

$1000

$500

$250

$125

$75

_$_

$10 is the minimum online donation.

DONATE NOW

**___** ___ (C) 2019 The American National Red Cross Terms of Use Privacy
Policy Contact Us FAQ Mobile Apps Give Blood
![Accessibility](/etc/clientlibs/redcross/shared/base/images/Accessibility.png)

/content/redcross/en/volunteer/volunteer-opportunities/volunteer-
internationally

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

