

__

#### Menu

                
                                      * Features
                      * Columns
                        * From the President
                        * On My Mind
                        * In Depth
                        * Student Spotlight
                      * University News
                      * Alumni
                      * Archives
                      * About Cairn Magazine
                

MENU __

# When Evangelism Meets Scientism

May, 2018June, 20185 minute readby Lydia Hill

__

Apologetics is the ministry of defending and commending the Christian faith,
in hopes of persuading people of its truthfulness, goodness, and beauty.
Admittedly, such persuasion is much more than an intellectual endeavor, but it
should certainly not be less. The Bible commands Jesus’ followers to always be
prepared to make a defense to those who ask us for the reason for our hope (1
Peter 3:15). We reason with people about the gospel so that ultimately they
might come to saving faith in Jesus. As Joshua Chatraw and Mark Allen write in
their text, _Apologetics at the Cross,_ "Apologetics is not the same thing as
the gospel, nor does it hold the same status; rather, apologetics should
function as the gospel's servant."

While seeing unbelievers find salvation in Christ is apologetics’ ultimate
aim, one of the most helpful things we can do when interacting with non-
Christians is help them better understand what it is they actually believe.
This is necessary because many people don’t take time to pause and reflect on
the assumptions and beliefs that lead them to dismiss the plausibility of
Christianity being true. In the West, a number of assumptions about the nature
of science and knowledge stand in the way of people giving Christianity a fair
hearing, making it necessary for Christians to understand how to recognize and
challenge them.

In his book _Science Set Free,_ Rupert Sheldrake, a cell biologist and
researcher, explains how the philosophy of materialism (the belief that
reality consists solely of matter and material processes) has become so linked
to science that to question its truthfulness is regarded as being
unscientific. Commenting on the pervasiveness of this assumption, he writes:
"Since the nineteenth century, a belief in materialism has indeed been
propagated with remarkable success: millions of people have been converted to
this 'scientific' view, even though they know very little about science
itself. They are, as it were, devotees of the Church of Science, or of
scientism, of which scientists are the priests." Scientism refers to the
belief that science is the sole means of knowing what is true or real.

Most people aren’t familiar with the technical terminology so the odds of your
meeting anyone who will identify him or herself as an adherent to scientism
are pretty slim. So, how do you recognize them? Listen for statements about
what can or can’t be known as factual. Someone saying something like “You
can’t say that you know that to be true because it hasn’t been proven,” is a
good sign. Now, if what they’re talking about is something about the natural
world, that’s one thing. But people will often extend this to all sorts of
claims that are not in themselves scientific. If you think that’s the case,
it’s helpful to ask a clarifying question like, “Would you say that science is
the only means of determining what’s true or real?” If they answer
affirmatively, you’re dealing with some form of scientism, and you can then
proceed to try to help them see some of the problems with such a view.

Perhaps the greatest flaw with scientism is the fact that it’s self-refuting.
Another way of saying that is that it falsifies itself by failing to meet the
standard it proposes as necessary for an item to qualify as factual or true
knowledge. Anyone who asserts “Science is the only means of knowing what is
true or real” is claiming that that statement is true. However, for the sake
of consistency, the only way that that sentence could be known to be true is
by means of some kind of scientific verification. But there is no way to
scientifically prove that the proposition is true. No experiment could be
performed to verify the claim. That’s because the claim is not one of science
but philosophy. It’s a claim about the conditions under which we’re justified
in claiming to know something to be true. But that’s not the jurisdiction of
science.

Yet another problem with adopting scientism is its high cost. Restricting
knowledge only to those claims that have been scientifically verified will
require giving up much that we take for granted that we know. For example, I
know that I had oatmeal with raisins and brown sugar for breakfast this
morning, but my confidence is not based on any scientific experiment but on my
memory. Embracing scientism necessitates that we abandon historical and moral
claims as well. When I encounter someone who holds to scientism, I usually ask
questions like “Is it true that torturing people for pleasure is wrong?” or
“Are there such things as basic human rights?” Most almost immediately answer
affirmatively (which is good). My next question is how either of those truths
can be arrived at by means of science. They can’t. Therefore, one must either
give up their belief that such claims are true, or they have to seriously
reconsider whether science is the only possible means of knowing what’s real
or true.

Finally, another difficulty for scientism is that if true, it makes the
foundations upon which science rests less sure than its conclusions.
Scientific inquiry assumes a number of things such as the existence of an
orderly world outside our minds, the existence and validity of laws of logic,
the general reliability of our senses, and the existence of moral norms (e.g.,
scientists should honestly report the results of their experiments). Because
such beliefs are foundational to the doing of science, they are not the
products of science in which case, if scientism were true, we could not
legitimately claim to know that they are true since they were not arrived at
scientifically.

None of the above is intended to disparage or reject science but to recognize
its limits. Apologetics should be about more than giving answers. It should
also be about asking strategic questions designed to make people consider the
soundness (or lack thereof) of their objections to Christianity. Helping those
who adhere to scientism see its flaws, may, by the grace of God, be the first
step toward their listening more attentively to the claims of Christ.

* * *

_Dr. Keith Plummer is a professor of theology at Cairn University. He can be
reached by emailing kplummer@cairn.edu._

# Post navigation

__Previous Post

Next Post __

Category: On My Mind

##### Share on

Twitter Facebook

Copyright © 2015 Cairn University

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

