

![Search](/assets/search-

blue-50d882bad209f42707a111e4f6e8a3067ddd1ee99202b5426bf84fafc412c16b.svg)

                
                                      * Agenda
                      * Initiatives
                      * Reports
                      * Events
                      * About
                

About

                
                                        * Our Mission
                        * Leadership and Governance
                        * Our Members and Partners
                        * Communities
                        * Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution
                        * Our Impact
                        * History
                        * Centre for Cybersecurity
                        * Klaus Schwab
                        * Pictures
                        * Media
                        * Contact Us
                        * Mapping Global Transformations 
                        * Careers
                        * World Economic Forum LLC
                        * Code of Conduct
                        * World Economic Forum Privacy Policy 
                        * Sustainability
                
                      * ![](/assets/globe-31c22c1da4efc4cb955e962a5f11edf1a5cf8d6b1e100632438667d36b9a6c7e.svg) English
                

![](/assets/globe-31c22c1da4efc4cb955e962a5f11edf1a5cf8d6b1e100632438667d36b9a6c7e.svg)
English

                
                                        * English
                        * Español
                        * Français
                        * 中文
                        * 日本語
                
                      * Login to TopLink
                

We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By using our website
you consent to all cookies in accordance with our updated Cookie Notice.

I accept

![](/assets/hamburger-6894591f25ff937d4e3fbf0b0886003ccd245ff4bd6a9318abfea2ae51339584.svg)

                
                                      * ![](/assets/logo-b66768797e3f785791fd157ffc33c27eeca6d5100b7f34d418f50d206f1a8004.svg)
                
                      * Agenda
                      * Initiatives
                      * Reports
                      * Events
                      * About
                
                      * ![](/assets/globe-31c22c1da4efc4cb955e962a5f11edf1a5cf8d6b1e100632438667d36b9a6c7e.svg) English
                
                        * English
                        * Español
                        * Français
                        * 中文
                        * 日本語
                
                      * TopLink
                
                      * ![](/assets/search-blue-50d882bad209f42707a111e4f6e8a3067ddd1ee99202b5426bf84fafc412c16b.svg) ![](/assets/cancel-a69fead62c801216b4d5c3dde8ec0462d9e6225435a8186f0dd5d185d06fbb07.svg)
                

![Search](/assets/search-

blue-50d882bad209f42707a111e4f6e8a3067ddd1ee99202b5426bf84fafc412c16b.svg)

                
                                      * Global Agenda
                      * Future of Energy
                      * Electricity
                      * Engineering and Construction
                

# Is this technology the answer to our CO2 emissions problem?

![A pipe for transporting carbon dioxide to removal equipment is shown at the

Tomakomai carbon, capture and storage \(CCS\) test site in Tomakomai, Hokkaido

prefecture, Japan March 22, 2018. Picture taken on March 22, 2018.

](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/large_XjZFMn4k9AYVC08sYM12GV8r_SPQIO0BcOA0Kl6Q-kA.jpg)

Carbon capture and storage can play a crucial in solving our CO2 problem.

Image: REUTERS/Aaron Sheldrick

19 Jan 2019

                
                                      1. Brad Page CEO, Global CCS Institute
                

Join our WhatsApp group

![](https://assets.weforum.org/tout/image/medium_V82gBeF1Ow7kp21o5LBE3TB3ui7YrRflRS5W6X3z67k.png)

Sign up here ![](/assets/further-reading-arrow--grey-

af5a6000f4deb911ff0f354e51a276706c6ed82f03e39a31a5dee8addc584309.svg)

Most Popular

![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_YJ4OXPzjOGdfCtVBbgDJnhNZjQ0MRUAqR3w5tx83hTA.jpg)![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_YJ4OXPzjOGdfCtVBbgDJnhNZjQ0MRUAqR3w5tx83hTA.jpg)

### Sweden has invented a word to encourage people not to fly. And it’s

working

Douglas Broom 05 Jun 2019

![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_No3r7W1iRMK0QmvtSmzLHJf86skXVlZwZ6r8cEyXQnU.jpg)![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_No3r7W1iRMK0QmvtSmzLHJf86skXVlZwZ6r8cEyXQnU.jpg)

### Who gains when the US and China fight over trade?

Douglas Broom 04 Jun 2019

![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_6soPIq34xoRGsEKn_jqCkJ29QKQkJBIh0UcIFZAYc2w.jpg)![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_6soPIq34xoRGsEKn_jqCkJ29QKQkJBIh0UcIFZAYc2w.jpg)

### This UK supermarket is selling a range of goods with no packaging

Douglas Broom 06 Jun 2019

More on the agenda ![](/assets/further-reading-arrow-

bfad9408ee3740806b4f6bb7f013062c5bb120da9f659d07d500a6978ad2056d.svg)

Explore context

![](/assets/tmap-

icon-c04cb0e1c304860258a35c69ffcf9000b05af20e7e4d1baaefeab57b0937061d.svg)

Future of Energy

![](https://assets.weforum.org/topic/transformation_map_image/medium_QHOFc1ZGprCYnY2oXJisbtjf1xN96fGH3diist_0GKw.png)

Explore the latest strategic trends, research and analysis
![](/assets/further-reading-arrow--grey-

af5a6000f4deb911ff0f354e51a276706c6ed82f03e39a31a5dee8addc584309.svg)

This article is part of the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting

Climate change is rattling the world. 2018 was the worst year to date in terms
of emissions.

Scientists predict a gloomy future: one of misery, destruction and
catastrophe. But the climate debate remains highly polarized. The world is too
busy picking winners and losers and pitting technologies against each other.
We are losing sight of what needs to be done: solving our CO2 problem.

Carbon capture and storage (CCS) has to play an important part in getting this
job done. CCS is a set of technologies that prevents CO2 emissions from
entering the atmosphere and stores them safely underground in dedicated
geological storage, and it can play a key role in reducing emissions and
achieving global climate targets. This technology is also an enabler of
negative emissions, through extracting CO2 from the atmosphere.

Often decried as an expensive and unproven fig-leaf for the fossil fuel
industry, the reality - that we cannot combat climate change without CCS - is,
for many, an inconvenient truth.

![A map of operational and under-construction CCS facilities around the world

](https://assets.weforum.org/editor/zgp5ntaaphzcap9AgV44QVrIrPMp0NRSoMALYxByt4Y.png)

A map of existing and planned CCS facilities around the world

Image: Global CCS Institute

The Paris climate agreement – in which the world has agreed to limit global
warming to well below 2˚C – cannot be reached without CCS. The International
Energy Agency’s Sustainable Development Scenario, which outlines the world’s
path to reaching the energy-related UN Sustainable Development Goals and the
Paris Agreement, forecasts that at least 7% of emissions reductions will need
to come from CCS.

Here’s one of the reasons why. Despite the acceleration of the green energy
revolution, the world is expected to continue to depend on fossil fuels for
its primary energy demand in the decades to come. According to the IEA, fossil
fuels satisfy 81% of primary energy demand today. In the Sustainable
Development Scenario this number is forecast to fall to 60%.

Ceasing construction of unabated sources of emissions is a must. Reports show
that the world is at risk of locking in its emissions iby continuing to build
coal plants without CCS today. While investments and the number of final
investment decisions for coal plants without CCS have declined, unabated coal-
fired power generation needs to decrease by 5.6% annually until 2030 to meet
the Sustainable Development Scenario. And this calculation doesn’t even
include all other unabated sources of emissions currently under construction.
This infrastructure in total is expected to account for 95% of the world’s
remaining total carbon budget until 2040. Deploying CCS to capture emissions
from the industrial and power sectors is the only viable solution.

Carbon capture will enable a just transition for workers currently employed in
the energy sector. It will build new low-carbon industries, repurpose existing
infrastructure and keeping industries competitive in a low-carbon future.

CCS will help renewables thrive. Clean, dispatchable, back-up power – for
example provided by natural gas plants with CCS – will be able to balance the
intermittent nature of wind and solar generation while keeping costs down. In
fact, researchers have found that CCS can reduce overall system costs and
capacity requirements. In the US, innovators are already working on a next-
generation natural gas power plant which is meant to provide reliable and
flexible carbon-free power at cost-parity with conventional combined cycle gas
power plants.

CCS remains the only technology that can deliver deep emissions reductions in
hard-to-abate industrial sectors such as steel, petrochemicals and cement.
After steel, the cement industry is the second-biggest source of industrial
emissions, currently accounting for 6% of global carbon emissions. As
population growth and urbanization are expected to reach unprecedented levels,
so will temissions from these industrial processes whose product demand is
tightly correlated with economic expansion. CCS is the only technology
available to deeply decarbonize these two sectors. In these sectors, CCS will
also help to keep the cost of abatement down. The International Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) found that a climate technology-mix without CCS will
likely result in more than double the cost to reach 2oC and that it is
doubtful that the objective can even be achieved without CCS. Two promising
projects in the cement industry in Norway and Belgium are currently underway.

In the long run, CCS can become the foundation of a new clean and sustainable
energy economy. The production of low-cost hydrogen with CCS opens a plethora
of opportunities for this energy vector in industry, heat, transportation and
energy production. In the UK, for instance, the CCS-equipped HyNet North West
facility is expected to produce hydrogen for industrial sites, home heating
and as transportation fuel. The project could potentially serve more than 2
million homes and businesses. And the H21 North of England project aims to
convert part of the northern UK gas grid to hydrogen decarbonized with CCS.

### Have you read?

                
                                      * Should Europe embrace carbon capture? 
                      * Is carbon capture technology economically viable? 
                      * This new method of carbon capture turns carbon dioxide into solid rock
                

As the world continues to emit more CO2, it is likely to overshoot its climate
goals. Direct air capture (DAC) technologies, albeit nascent, will be able to
suck CO2 out of the air. The deployment of CCS provides learning opportunities
and infrastructure for these early technologies.

Currently, CCS deployment is off-track. There are 43 large-scale CCS
facilities – 18 in commercial operation, five under construction and 20 in
various stages of development around the world. Projections estimate that by
2040, we will need more than 2,000. While abundant storage is mapped and
available to trap hundreds of years of emissions, there is still a long way to
go in terms of policy and deployment.

The first step would be to recognize that there is no silver bullet. We can no
longer afford to ignore CCS, or talk about one solution vs another; the goal
must be to eliminate CO2. We need energy efficiency. We need renewable energy.
We need CCS. It’s time to embrace an all-encompassing approach to clean energy
globally – one with consistent government and private sector support – and the
only approach that will enable us to reach our climate goals.

Share

Written by

Brad Page, CEO, Global CCS Institute

The views expressed in this article are those of the author alone and not the
World Economic Forum.

Join our WhatsApp group

![](https://assets.weforum.org/tout/image/medium_V82gBeF1Ow7kp21o5LBE3TB3ui7YrRflRS5W6X3z67k.png)

Sign up here ![](/assets/further-reading-arrow--grey-

af5a6000f4deb911ff0f354e51a276706c6ed82f03e39a31a5dee8addc584309.svg)

Explore context

![](/assets/tmap-

icon-c04cb0e1c304860258a35c69ffcf9000b05af20e7e4d1baaefeab57b0937061d.svg)

Future of Energy

![](https://assets.weforum.org/topic/transformation_map_image/medium_QHOFc1ZGprCYnY2oXJisbtjf1xN96fGH3diist_0GKw.png)

Explore the latest strategic trends, research and analysis
![](/assets/further-reading-arrow--grey-

af5a6000f4deb911ff0f354e51a276706c6ed82f03e39a31a5dee8addc584309.svg)

**Subscribe for updates**

A weekly update of what’s on the Global Agenda

## Featured: Future of Energy View all ![](/assets/thin-

chevron-491f10d0cb058e9bd64f4cd5fa76b85e5b6c532f8cc93b3dd84dee080e91fd03.svg)

![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/small_tbugFxOQWUxMZj-8P7y3aPVizcghNz_G5aRE9-VUzTg.jpg)![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny_tbugFxOQWUxMZj-8P7y3aPVizcghNz_G5aRE9-VUzTg.jpg)

### Chart of the day: This is what happened to CO2 emissions in the EU last

year

Douglas Broom 05 Jun 2019

![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/small__zdooYrev3rT7tTgYUQHAQTX2pBZmHirKDe_BT1B98w.jpg)![](https://assets.weforum.org/article/image/tiny__zdooYrev3rT7tTgYUQHAQTX2pBZmHirKDe_BT1B98w.jpg)

### 5 ways to #BeatAirPollution

Emma Charlton 05 Jun 2019

### How hydrogen can offer a clean energy future

Fatih Birol · Financial Times 05 Jun 2019

### Scientists want to use bacteria to revolutionize energy storage

Paul Ratner · Big Think 28 May 2019

### Ghana will grow faster than any other economy this year, the IMF says why

Charlotte Edmond 24 May 2019

### India is investing more money in solar power than coal for first time

Charlotte Edmond 22 May 2019

### How Japan's renewables-powered Olympics could kick off a global race for

clean energy

Niki J.P. Alsford · The Conversation 22 May 2019

**Subscribe for updates**

A weekly update of what’s on the Global Agenda

Follow Us

About

Our Mission

Leadership and Governance

Our Members and Partners

Globalization 4.0

The Fourth Industrial Revolution

Communities

Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution

Our Impact

History

Centre for Cybersecurity

Klaus Schwab

Pictures

Media

Contact Us

Mapping Global Transformations

Careers

Open Forum

World Economic Forum LLC

Code of Conduct

World Economic Forum Privacy Policy

Sustainability

Media

News

Accreditation

Subscribe to our news

Members & Partners

Member login to TopLink

Strategic Partners' area

Partner Institutes' area

Global sites

Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution

Centre for Cybersecurity

Open Forum

Global Shapers

Schwab Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship

EN ES FR 中文 日本語

© 2019 World Economic Forum

Privacy Policy & Terms of Service

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic

