

__

You are the owner of this article.

__Edit Article __Add New Article

Login

E-Paper

__News

                
                                      * Local News
                      * Communities
                      * Crime
                      * Education
                      * Lifestyles
                      * Night and Day
                      * Police Reports
                      * Video
                      * Business
                

__Sports

                
                                      * Local Sports
                      * Buffalo Bills
                      * Buffalo Sabres
                      * College Sports
                      * High School Sports
                      * National Sports
                

__Opinion

                
                                      * Columns
                      * Editorials
                      * Letters to the Editor
                

__Community

                
                                      * Anniversaries
                      * Births
                      * Engagements
                      * Weddings
                

Celebrations

Obituaries

__Classifieds

                
                                      * Jobs
                      * Autos
                      * Homes
                      * Place An Ad
                

App

Public Notices

__Contact Us

                
                                      * Purchase Photos
                      * Submit a Letter to the Editor
                      * Submit a News Tip
                      * Place an Obituary
                

__Subscribe

                
                                      * Start a Subscription
                      * Manage My Subscription
                      * E-Paper
                      * App Downloads
                      * Newsletter
                

__Shop

                
                                      * Coupons
                      * Weekly Ads
                      * Newspaper Ads
                
                      * 58°
                        * #### __Niagara Falls, NY (14301)
                

##### Today

Some clouds. Low 52F. Winds light and variable..

##### Tonight

Some clouds. Low 52F. Winds light and variable.

__Updated: June 6, 2019 @ 11:17 pm

                
                                        *             * __Full Forecast
                

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

Niagara Falls, New York

                
                                      * __ Newsletter
                      * __ Facebook
                      * __ Twitter
                      * __ YouTube
                      * __ Instagram
                

Toggle navigation Menu

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

                
                                      *             * Search
                
                      * Contact Us
                        * Purchase Photos
                        * Submit a Letter to the Editor
                        * Submit a News Tip
                        * Place an Obituary
                      * Subscribe
                        * Start a Subscription
                        * Manage My Subscription
                        * E-Paper
                        * App Downloads
                        * Newsletter
                      * Login
                
                      *             * About Us
                        * Contact Us
                        * Advertise with Us
                      * E-Paper
                      * App
                      * Celebrations
                      * Text Alerts
                      * Obituaries
                      * Public Notices
                

Close

1 of 2

__

![070522 NYPA Board �NG](https://bloximages.chicago2.vip.townnews.com/niagara-

gazette.com/content/tncms/assets/v3/editorial/0/1c/01cef6e1-7f4e-59df-82ef-34109a341a49/53ed9b8ce041c.image.jpg?resize=1200%2C936)

__

James Neiss/Staff Photographer Niagara Falls, NY �New York Power Authority
Board Chairman Frank S. McCullough, Jr., presides over a meeting of the Board
of Trustees at the Niagara Falls facility. The board usually meets in White
Planes, NY.

                
                                      * Niagara Gazette
                

__

![070522 Scholarship

�NG](https://bloximages.chicago2.vip.townnews.com/niagara-

gazette.com/content/tncms/assets/v3/editorial/b/3c/b3c0d12a-32b0-5539-b1e8-bc946322c505/53eda9cc4bca3.image.jpg?resize=1200%2C830)

__

James Neiss/Staff Photographer Niagara Falls, NY �New York Power Authority
President and CEO Timothy S. Carey, left, and Board Chairman Frank S.
McCullough, Jr., right awarded full scholarships to Nicholas Smiedala and
Brooke Patterson, both of the Tuscarora Indian nation. The two are winners of
the first Niagara Power Project Relicensing Scholarships for members of the
Tuscarora Nation.

                
                                      * Niagara Gazette
                

# NYPA: Authority accepts Niagara operating license

                
                                      * By Aaron Besecker/beseckera@gnnewspaper.com
                      * May 22, 2007
                      * __
                

![070522 NYPA Board �NG](https://bloximages.chicago2.vip.townnews.com/niagara-

gazette.com/content/tncms/assets/v3/editorial/0/1c/01cef6e1-7f4e-59df-82ef-34109a341a49/53ed9b8ce041c.image.jpg?resize=1200%2C936)

James Neiss/Staff Photographer Niagara Falls, NY �New York Power Authority
Board Chairman Frank S. McCullough, Jr., presides over a meeting of the Board
of Trustees at the Niagara Falls facility. The board usually meets in White
Planes, NY.

                
                                      * Niagara Gazette
                

__

![070522 Scholarship

�NG](https://bloximages.chicago2.vip.townnews.com/niagara-

gazette.com/content/tncms/assets/v3/editorial/b/3c/b3c0d12a-32b0-5539-b1e8-bc946322c505/53eda9cc4bca3.image.jpg?resize=1200%2C830)

James Neiss/Staff Photographer Niagara Falls, NY �New York Power Authority
President and CEO Timothy S. Carey, left, and Board Chairman Frank S.
McCullough, Jr., right awarded full scholarships to Nicholas Smiedala and
Brooke Patterson, both of the Tuscarora Indian nation. The two are winners of
the first Niagara Power Project Relicensing Scholarships for members of the
Tuscarora Nation.

                
                                      * Niagara Gazette
                

LEWISTON — The New York Power Authority Board of Trustees formally accepted a
new 50-year operating license for the Niagara Power Project from federal
regulators during a meeting at the project Tuesday.

The action comes one week after regulators extended the review period for
remaining concerns about the granting of a new license.

Rick Chase, the authority’s top hydropower relicensing official, recommended
to trustees they accept the license even though three groups’ concerns are
still before the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

The authority needs to be ready to implement settlement agreements, Chase
said.

Members of the Niagara Improvement Association, Public Power Coalition and
Eastern Niagara Power Project Alliance believe they deserve compensation from
the power authority based on effects of the power project’s operation before a
new license is granted.

Tuesday’s move by trustees, a mere formality in the process, also follows a
March 15 declaration by the commission which ordered a new license be granted.

The authority received its first federal operating license in 1957. The
project, which is the state’s largest hydropower facility, saw its first power
produced in 1961.

The authority negotiated several settlement agreements with numerous parties
gaining their support for a renewed license.

Parties including Niagara University, the Tuscarora Nation and members of the
Niagara Power Coalition stand to receive benefits from a pool with a present
value of nearly $500 million over the next 50 years.

The coalition consists of Niagara County, Niagara Falls, the towns of Lewiston
and Niagara, as well as the school districts of Niagara Falls, Niagara-
Wheatfield and Lewiston-Porter.

Coalition members are set to receive annual payments of $8 million as well as
an allocation of low-cost power.

In other power authority matters:

n Authority trustees approved contracts with nine entities, including members
of the Niagara Power Coalition, the Tuscarora Nation and Niagara University
for the sale of low-cost power.

Each entity involved in the relicensing process secured allocations of cheap
hydropower, an amount totaling at least 29 megawatts, through settlement
negotiations with the authority.

The contracts, whose terms begin Sept. 1 and are set to expire Sept. 1, 2025,
will be sent to the governor’s office for approval.

n Authority trustees approved the last of a five-year series of $8 million
annual payments to the state Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic
Preservation. The funds will be used for operations and maintenance at state
parks in Niagara and St. Lawrence counties, power authority officials said.

n Tuesday marked the first time in several years the authority’s Board of
Trustees held a regular monthly meeting at the Niagara Power Project.

COUPON DEALS

NEWSPAPER ADS

#### This Week's Circulars

![](https://static.cnhionline.com/niagaragazette/images/BB_NIA.jpg)

![](https://static.cnhionline.com/niagaragazette/images/garagesale_webheader.jpg)

![](https://static.cnhionline.com/lockportjournal/images/INMEM_2.jpg)

## ELECTION 2019

                
                                      * Houghton announces bid for legislature seat
                      * VIDEO: May 30's Democratic mayoral primary debate
                      * Langworthy announces run for state GOP chairmanship
                      * Sirianni seeking re election to town board
                      * Town, county primary battles in focus
                      * Grozio announces reelection campaign
                      * Accardo announces county legislature bid
                

#### Obituaries

![GEDEON, SR., Robert Mar 15, 1933 - Jun 6,

2019](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

#### GEDEON, SR., Robert Mar 15, 1933 - Jun 6, 2019

![DILAURA, John Mar 23, 1923 - May 5,

2019](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

#### DILAURA, John Mar 23, 1923 - May 5, 2019

![CALATO, Katherine "Kay" Jun 20, 1926 - Jun 4,

2019](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

#### CALATO, Katherine "Kay" Jun 20, 1926 - Jun 4, 2019

![MASICH, Paulette Jan 1, 1953 - May 28,

2019](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

#### MASICH, Paulette Jan 1, 1953 - May 28, 2019

![EWING, Essie Sep 21, 1930 - May 29,

2019](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

#### EWING, Essie Sep 21, 1930 - May 29, 2019

### Today's E-Edition

![](https://niagaragazette-cnhi.newsmemory.com/getprima.php)

### This Week's Night & Day

![](https://static.cnhionline.com/niagaragazette/images/NAD/NAD.jpg)

### Most Popular

                
                                      * __Articles
                      * __Images
                      * __Videos
                      * __Commented
                

#### Articles

                
                                      * Sullivan: Sabres should think twice about re-signing Skinner
                      * Vandals damage holy statues at Fatima Shrine
                      * Colucci indicted on child porn charges
                      * 2 men charged in fatal robbery at Falls store
                      * Motions filed in Lewiston house party case
                      * NU's Brash ready to hear name called at MLB draft
                      * Climbing down into the Niagara Gorge
                      * New life sought for long-closed Niagara Post Theater at Fort Niagara State Park
                      * Teen linked to LaSalle shooting
                      * Yankees to honor Falls native Joyce
                

#### Images

                
                                      * ![190529 Tour de Cure Enterprise](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                
                      * ![190529 Tour de Cure Enterprise 2.jpg](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                
                      * ![Democratic mayoral hopefuls Piccirillo, Restaino face off in debate](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                
                      * ![190528 Cleve Jones 1](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                
                      * ![190528 Greg Hastings 3](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                
                      * ![190529 Slow Ride 2.jpg](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                
                      * ![190529 Slow Ride 1.jpg](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                
                      * ![Gadacz the pick to lead NF hoops](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                
                      * ![190515 Como Soppressata 5](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                

#### Videos

                
                                      *           * ![VIDEO: Making polenta with Nickel City opera stars Suzanne Fatta and Valerian Ruminski](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                
                      * ![VIDEO: May 30's Democratic mayoral primary debate](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAEAAAABCAQAAAC1HAwCAAAAC0lEQVR42mM8Uw8AAh0BTZud3BwAAAAASUVORK5CYII=)
                
                      * #### Commented
                

Sorry, there are no recent results for popular commented articles.

### Buy Photos

Buy photos here

First Amendment: Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of
religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom
of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble,
and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.

#### Contact Information

**niagara-gazette.com**  
473 Third Street  
Niagara Falls, NY 14301  
**Phone:** (716) 282-2311  
**Email:** ngedit@niagara-gazette.com

#### Services

                
                                      * About Us
                      * Contact Us
                      * Advertise with Us
                      * Subscriber Services
                      * Submission Forms
                      * Advertiser Index
                

#### Sections

                
                                      * Home
                      * News
                      * Sports
                      * Community
                      * Opinion
                      * Obituaries
                      * Photos
                      * Video Gallery
                      * Weather
                

![](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAAQAAAADCAQAAAAe/WZNAAAAEElEQVR42mM8U88ABowYDABAxQPltt5zqAAAAABJRU5ErkJggg==)

![](https://static.cnhionline.com/cnhi/images/rtj_ad.jpg)

(C) Copyright 2019 Niagara Gazette, 473 Third Street Niagara Falls, NY | Terms
of Use | Privacy Policy

Powered by BLOX Content Management System from TownNews.com.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

