

Business Insider logo The words "Business Insider".

                
                                      * Tech
                      * Finance
                      * Politics
                      * Strategy
                      * Life
                      * All
                

##### Tech

                
                                        * Tech Insider
                        * Media
                        * Science
                        * Transportation
                

##### Finance

                
                                        * Finance
                        * Markets Insider
                        * Retail
                        * Your Money
                

##### Politics

                
                                        * Politics
                        * Military & Defense
                

##### Strategy

                
                                        * Strategy
                        * Advertising
                        * Careers
                

##### Life

                
                                        * Life
                        * Coupons
                        * Entertainment
                        * Insider Picks
                        * Sports
                

##### Featured

                
                                        * Better Capitalism
                        * Embracing Disruption
                        * Insider TV
                

##### Subscribe

                
                                        * BI Intelligence
                        * BI Prime
                

##### About BI

                
                                        * About
                        * Careers
                        * Contact Us
                        * Advertise
                        * Contributors FAQ
                        * Corporate
                        * Corrections Policy
                

##### Follow BI

                
                                        * Newsletters
                        * Events
                        * RSS
                        * Facebook
                        * Twitter
                        * Instagram
                        * YouTube
                        * LinkedIn
                

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

                
                                      * BUSINESS INSIDER
                      * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
                      * BI INTELLIGENCE
                

World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

Edition

                
                                      * BI Prime
                      * Intelligence
                

Menu icon A vertical stack of three evenly spaced horizontal lines.

Edition

International Editions:

                
                                      * United States US
                

Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

                
                                      * International INTL
                      * Deutschland DE
                      * Australia AUS
                      * France FR
                      * India IN
                      * Italy IT
                      * Japan JP
                      * Malaysia MY
                      * Netherlands NL
                      * Nordic SE
                      * Poland PL
                      * Singapore SG
                      * South Africa ZA
                      * Spain ES
                

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile. Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click
to perform a search". World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating
different international options."

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

                
                                      * BUSINESS INSIDER
                      * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
                      * BI INTELLIGENCE
                
                      * Tech Enterprise  Science  advertising  Media  Transportation  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
                      * Finance Markets Insider  Retail  Your Money  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
                      * Politics Military & Defense  News  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
                      * Strategy Careers  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
                      * Life Entertainment  Travel  Sports  Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
                      * All
                      * Coupons Target  Walmart  EBay  Nike  Container Store
                

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

                
                                      * BUSINESS INSIDER
                      * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
                      * BI INTELLIGENCE
                

World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

Edition

US INTL DE AUS FR IN IT JP MY NL SE PL SG ZA ES Business Insider logo The
words "Business Insider". Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter
icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word
"in". YouTube icon A play button in the shape of a television screen.
Instagram icon A stylized camera. * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights
reserved. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our

                
                                      * Terms of Service ,  Privacy Policy and  Cookies Policy . 
                      * Sitemap
                      * Disclaimer
                      * Commerce Policy
                      * Coupons
                      * Made in NYC
                      * Stock quotes by finanzen.net
                

Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click to perform a search".
Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification.

# Bush's Oil Cronies: Where Are They Now?

Graham Winfrey

Jan. 25, 2010, 3:45 PM

Facebook Icon The letter F. Link icon An image of a chain link. It symobilizes
a website link url. Email icon An envelope. It indicates the ability to send
an email. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn
icon The word "in". Fliboard icon A stylized letter F.

More icon Three evenly spaced dots forming an ellipsis: "...". Close icon Two
crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an interaction, or
dismiss a notification.

List icon A bulleted list of stacked lines. Double angles pointing left Two
angles facing left, which often indicate, "return to the beginning." Double
angles pointing right Two angles facing right, which often indicate, "advance
to the end."

![AP Bush Oil Cronies](/image/4b55f8b50000000000498764/ap-bush-oil-

cronies.jpg)In the year 2000, then Texas Governor George W. Bush's
presidential campaign received more donations from the oil and gas industry
than any other federal candidate over the previous decade.

Bush himself was a former Texas oil executive, and during his time as
president, two books concerning "W" and oil were published with the word
"Cronies" in the title: 2003's _Crude Politics: How Bush's Oil Cronies
Hijacked The War On Terrorism,_ by Paul Sperry, and 2004's _Cronies: Oil, The
Bushes, And The Rise Of Texas, America's Superstate_.

What are they up to?

We've compiled a list of some of former President George W. Bush's major oil
cronies, revealing their connection to oil and what they're up to now.

## Check Out Bush's Oil Cronies: Where Are They Now? >

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 1/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Former Vice President Dick Cheney

Before becoming George W. Bush's Vice President, Dick Cheney secured a
retirement package from oil services behemoth Halliburton worth more than
$33.7 million.

While working on the U.S.'s new energy bill, Cheney conducted a number of
secret meetings with executives at energy industry companies. One had been
doing business with Halliburton since 1959, and 19 were among the top 25
energy industry financial contributors to the Republican Party.

Since leaving office, Cheney has been appearing on Sunday talk shows and cable
TV, criticizing President Obama repeatedly for making America "less safe" and
"trying to pretend we are not at war" with terrorists

(via _The Washington Post_ , **ABC News** and _HalliburtonWatch.org_ )

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 2/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Former Secretary of State Condolezza Rice

Many don't know that Rice was a longtime director of Chevron Corp., now
ChevronTexaco, the largest energy producer in the Caspian Sea. She resigned in
January of 2001, after ten years with the company.

Rice made headlines in January of 2009 when she was signed as a client by the
William Morris Agency. Under the deal, the agency will represent Rice for
books, lecture appearances and "philanthropic initiatives, as well as business
initiatives in media, sports and communications."

Pictured above, Rice walks on the field before the start of the Sun Bowl
football game between her alma mater Stanford and Oklahoma on Dec. 31, 2009

(via _The Telegraph_ , _SFGate.com_ and _Crude Politics: How Bush's Oil
Cronies Hijacked The War On Terrorism_ and _Reuters_ )

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 3/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Former Commerce Secretary Donald L. Evans

Donald Evans and George W. Bush have been close friends since the two were
kids in Houston. Before serving as Bush's Commerce Secretary, Evans was CEO of
the oil company Tom Brown Inc. When Bush appointed Evans as his Commerce
Secretary, Tom Brown paid him a $5.3 million retirement package.

Since October of 2007, Evans has held the position of Head of the Board and
Nonexecutive Chairman for Energy Future Holdings, a privately held energy
company based in Dallas, formerly known as TXU Corp. before its acquisition by
a group of investors led by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., TPG and Goldman
Sachs Capital Partners.

Above, Evans (at right) shakes hands with Southern Methodist University
President R. Gerald Turner in 2008, after signing an agreement to place the
presidential library at SMU in Dallas.

(via _TPJ.org_ , _Crude Politics: How Bush's Oil Cronies Hijacked The War On
Terrorism_ ) _and EnergyFutureHoldings.com_ )

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 4/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Former Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage

Before becoming Deputy Secretary of State and war cabinet aide reporting
directly to Secretary of State Colin Powell, Richard Armitage was the
president of Arimitage Associates L.C., a Washington Lobbying group with
Caspian oil clients, from May 1993 until March 2001.

Armitage currently serves on the Board of Directors of the ConocoPhillips oil
company and ManTech International Corporation, a "leading provider of
innovative technologies and solutions for mission-critical national security
programs for the Intelligence Community; the departments of Defense, State,
Homeland Security and Justice; the Space Community; National Oceanic
Atmospheric Administration; and other U.S. federal government customers."

(via _Crude Politics: How Bush's Oil Cronies Hijacked The War On Terrorism_
_,_ _ArmitageInternational.com_ and _ManTech.com_ _)_

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 5/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Former United States Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad

Former Ambassador to both Afghanistan and Iraq under George W. Bush, Zalmay
Khalilzad also worked as an adviser to Unocal, the oil giant, in the 1990s.
During his time there, Unocal tried to reach a pipeline deal with the Taliban,
who had seized power in Afghanistan in 1996.

In Michael Moore's "Fahrenheit 9/11," Moore highlighted the future
ambassador's statement that "The Taliban does not practice the anti-U.S. style
of fundamentalism practiced by Iran -- it is closer to the Saudi model." The
film also pointed out that Khalilzad met with Taliban representatives in
Houston, TX.

Khalilzad now runs a private consulting business and is affiliated with the
Center for Strategic and International Studies. In a September, 2009 interview
with ForeignPolicy.com, Khalilzad criticized both President Obama and George
W. Bush for making "mistakes" in their dealings with Afghan President Hamid
Karzai.

(via _ForeignPolicy.com_ )

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 6/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Now don't miss...

## The Ten Countries With The Most Dwindling Oil Production >

Triangle icon It can indicate: previous / next navigation options, or an
expandable section, or sometimes playable media. Previous 1/ Next Triangle
icon It can indicate: previous / next navigation options, or an expandable
section, or sometimes playable media.

Get the latest Oil WTI price here.

More: Oil Features George W. Bush Politics

### Popular

#### Jeff Bezos took the controls of some 'weirdly natural' giant robot hands

but could not solve the riddle of a Rubik's cube

### Popular

#### Paul Pierce confessed to a long-standing NBA conspiracy theory about his

infamous 'wheelchair injury' in the NBA Finals

### Popular

#### The riskiest vacation hot spots in the Caribbean, ranked

### Popular

#### Sorry, Apple's controversial $1,000 computer-screen stand isn't a rip-

off — it's a missed opportunity

### Popular

#### Jeff Bezos explains why he prefers people who 'are right a lot' and how

anyone can learn to be right a lot, too

Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification. Check mark icon A check mark. It
indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction.

Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an
open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word "in". YouTube icon A play button
in the shape of a television screen. Instagram icon A stylized camera.

Also check out: * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights reserved.
Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our

                
                                      * Terms of Service ,  Privacy Policy and  Cookies Policy . 
                      * Sitemap
                      * Disclaimer
                      * Commerce Policy
                      * Coupons
                      * Made in NYC
                      * Stock quotes by finanzen.net
                

Edition

International Editions:

                
                                      * United States US
                

Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

                
                                      * International INTL
                      * Deutschland DE
                      * Australia AUS
                      * France FR
                      * India IN
                      * Italy IT
                      * Japan JP
                      * Malaysia MY
                      * Netherlands NL
                      * Nordic SE
                      * Poland PL
                      * Singapore SG
                      * South Africa ZA
                      * Spain ES
                

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

