
>

>> # Watts Up With That?

>>

>> ## The world's most viewed site on global warming and climate change

>>

>> # Menu

>>

>> Skip to content

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                         * About

>>  
>>                         * Awards

>>  
>>                         * Contact

>>  
>>                         * Compose story

>>  
>>                         * FAQs

>>  
>>                         * My Blog Spawn

>>  
>>                         * Policy

>>  
>>                         * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                         * Publications and Projects

>>  
>>                       * Climate FAIL Files

>>  
>>                         * Al Gore and Bill Nye FAIL at doing a simple CO2
experiment

>>  
>>                         * List of excuses for 'The Pause' in global warming

>>  
>>                         * The Gore-a-thon on WUWT

>>  
>>                       * Climategate

>>  
>>                       * Reference Pages

>>  
>>                         * Atmosphere Page

>>  
>>                           * CO2 Page

>>  
>>                           * Atmospheric Oscillation Page

>>  
>>                         * Climatic Phenomena

>>  
>>                           * ENSO Page

>>  
>>                           * ENSO Forecast Page

>>  
>>                           * Polar Vortex Page

>>  
>>                           * Northern Polar Vortex Page

>>  
>>                           * Southern Polar Vortex Page

>>  
>>                         * "Extreme Weather" Page

>>  
>>                           * Tornado Page

>>  
>>                           * Tropical Cyclone Page

>>  
>>                         * Geomagnetism Page

>>  
>>                         * Global Temperature – Climate

>>  
>>                           * Global Climate Page

>>  
>>                           * Global Temperature Page

>>  
>>                         * Glossary

>>  
>>                         * Ocean Page

>>  
>>                           * Oceanic Oscillation Page

>>  
>>                         * Paleoclimate Page

>>  
>>                         * Sea Ice Page

>>  
>>                           * Beaufort Sea Ice Page

>>  
>>                           * Great Lakes Ice Page

>>  
>>                           * Northern Regional Sea Ice Page

>>  
>>                         * Research

>>  
>>                           * Potential Climatic Variables Page

>>  
>>                           * The Spencer-Braswell & Dessler papers

>>  
>>                         * Solar Page

>>  
>>                         * US Weather – Climate

>>  
>>                           * US Climate Page

>>  
>>                           * US Weather Page

>>  
>>                       * Submit story

>>  
>>                       * Tips and Notes

>>  
>>                       * Test

>>  
>>

>> # NASA-MIT study evaluates efficiency of oceans as heat sink, atmospheric

>>

>> gases sponge

>>

>> charles the moderator / July 13, 2017

>>

>>
![](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2017/07/2598_large_mp4-12629_amoccarbon_large-00001_print.jpg?w=720)![](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2017/07/2598_large_mp4-12629_amoccarbon_large-00001_print.jpg?w=720)Feature
| June 13, 2017

>>

>> From NASA

>>

>> ### NASA-MIT study evaluates efficiency of oceans as heat sink, atmospheric

>>

>> gases sponge

>>

>> Credit: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center.

>>

>> By Ellen Gray,

>>

>> NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center

>>

>> The world's oceans are like brakes slowing down the full effects of
greenhouse gas warming of the atmosphere. Over the last ten years, one-fourth
of human-emissions of carbon dioxide as well as 90 percent of additional
warming due to the greenhouse effect have been absorbed by the oceans. Acting
like a massive sponge, the oceans pull from the atmosphere heat, carbon
dioxide and other gases, such as chlorofluorocarbons, oxygen and nitrogen and
store them in their depths for decades to centuries and millennia.

>>

>> New NASA research is one of the first studies to estimate how much and how
quickly the ocean absorbs atmospheric gases and contrast it with the
efficiency of heat absorption. Using two computer models that simulate the
ocean, NASA and MIT scientists found that gases are more easily absorbed over
time than heat energy. In addition, they found that in scenarios where the
ocean current slows down due to the addition of heat, the ocean absorbs less
of both atmospheric gases and heat, though its ability to absorb heat is more
greatly reduced. The results were published in _Geophysical Research Letters_
, a journal of the American Geophysical Union.

>>

>> “As the ocean slows down, it will keep uptaking gases like carbon dioxide
more efficiently, much more than it will keep uptaking heat. It will have a
different behavior for chemistry than it has for temperature,” said Anastasia
Romanou, lead author and climate scientist at NASA's Goddard Institute for
Space Studies and Columbia University in New York City.

>>

>> Credit: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center.

>>

>> She and colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in
Cambridge, Massachusetts used the NASA GISS ocean model and the MIT General
Circulation Model to simulate one of the Atlantic's major current systems that
delivers absorbed heat and gases to the depths.

>>

>> In the Atlantic Ocean, the Gulf Stream is part of what's called the
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, a conveyor belt of ocean water
that carries warm water from Florida to Greenland where it cools and sinks to
1000 meters (about 3281 feet) or more before traveling back down the coast to
the tropics. On its northward journey, the water at the surface absorbs gases
like carbon dioxide and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) – the latter are, to a
large extent, the gases responsible for the ozone hole over Antarctica – as
well as excess heat from the atmosphere. When it sinks near Greenland, those
dissolved gases and heat energy are effectively buried in the ocean for years
to decades and longer. Removed from the atmosphere by the ocean, the impact of
their warming on the climate has been dramatically reduced.

>>

>> To understand and quantify the ocean's sponge-like capabilities, the
researchers used the two independent models of Atlantic Ocean currents
together with shipboard observations of chlorofluorocarbons as a starting
point. Chlorofluorocarbons are what's called a passive tracer.

>>

>> ![AMOC/Gulf Stream

map](https://climate.nasa.gov/internal_resources/1166)![AMOC/Gulf Stream

map](https://climate.nasa.gov/internal_resources/1166) The red line on the map
shows the Gulf Stream current, the surface portion of the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation. Shown in shades of blue are the concentrations of
CFCs at depth in the ocean. Nearer to the equator, the CFCs only occur at the
surface. As the Gulf Stream current moves north, they begin to be drawn down
to depth with the downward pull of the conveyor belt. Image credit: NASA/Jenny
Hottle.

>>

>> “I think of it as a colored dye,” said co-author John Marshall, a professor
of oceanography at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. “If I have a
bucket of water and just stir it around and put some food coloring in it, the
dye goes down into the water, and it doesn’t influence the circulation of the
water.”

>>

>> In the real world as well as in the model, this allows scientists to “see”
how much of the gas is absorbed from the atmosphere into the ocean and then
follow it as it travels around the world in the currents. Adding heat to the
ocean, in contrast, slows down the overturning circulation because ocean
currents depend on temperature gradients – moving from warmer locations to
cooler locations – that weaken under global warming as cooler waters heat up.
This means that estimating how much heat the ocean absorbs by only using a
tracer may not be accurate.

>>

>> “The results show that we need to think differently about how the ocean
responds to taking up heat and passive tracers or greenhouse gases. Then we
need to study them in parallel but using different methods,” Romanou said.

>>

>> These results from the computer models of the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation are one of the many moving parts that come together in
global climate models. By refining scientists’ understanding of how
efficiently gases and heat are taken up, the finding will improve global
climate model projections for future climate scenarios, said Marshall. This is
especially true for projections that stretch tens or a hundred years into the
future, when those tracers and other gases that behave similarly like carbon
dioxide, as well as excess heat energy, reach the upward turn of the conveyor
belt and return to the surface. When that happens some portion of them will
return to the atmosphere after their long underwater journey around the
planet.

>>

>> “Most of the excess heat from climate change will go into the ocean
eventually, we think,” Romanou said. “Most of the excess chemical pollutants
and greenhouse gases will be buried in the ocean. But the truth is that the
ocean recirculates that extra load and, at some point, will release some of it
back to the atmosphere, where it will keep raising temperatures, even if
future carbon dioxide emissions were to be much lower than they are now.”

>>

>> This eventual release of buried gases and heat from the oceans is sometimes
called the “warming in the pipeline” or “warming commitment” that people will
eventually have to contend with, Romanou said.

>>

>> ###### Reference

>>

>> Romanou, A., J. Marshall, M. Kelley, and J. Scott, 2017: Role of the
ocean's AMOC in setting the uptake efficiency of transient tracers. Geophys.
Res. Lett., early on-line, doi:10.1002/2017gl072972.

>>

>> ###### Media contacts

>>

>> Leslie McCarthy, NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, New York, N.Y.,
212-678-5507, leslie.m.mccarthy@nasa.gov

>>

>> Michael Cabbage, NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, New York, N.Y.,
212-678-5516, mcabbage@nasa.gov

>>

>> Original Article Here.

>>

>> ###

>>

>> Advertisements

>>

>> ### Share this:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Print

>>  
>>                       * Email

>>  
>>                       * Twitter

>>  
>>                       * Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Pinterest

>>  
>>                       * LinkedIn

>>  
>>                       * Reddit

>>  
>>                       * ### Like this:

>>  
>>

>> Like Loading...

>>

>> July 13, 2017 in Oceans. Tags: CO2 sink, NASA, Ocean Circulation

>>

>> ### Related posts

>>

>> ![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/03/aquarium-phytoplankton-10.jpg)

>>

>> ### How deep-ocean vents fuel massive phytoplankton blooms

>>

>> ![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/201590_web-50x50.jpg)

>>

>> ### Mapping the global distribution of phytoplankton

>>

>> ![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/clip_image002_thumb-1-50x50.jpg)

>>

>> ### Continuous observations in the North Atlantic challenges current view

>>

>> about ocean circulation variability

>>

>> # Post navigation

>>

>> <- New York Times: World's nations building huge numbers of new coal plants
despite emissions growth

>>

>> Study Recommends Having One Less Child Because Climate ->

>>

>> ## 221 thoughts on "NASA-MIT study evaluates efficiency of oceans as heat

>>

>> sink, atmospheric gases sponge"

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. JohnWho says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:10 pm

>>

>> "Over the last ten years, one-fourth of human-emissions of carbon dioxide
as well as 90 percent of additional warming due to the greenhouse effect have
been absorbed by the oceans."  
>  Um,why only 25% of human emitted CO2 and not an equal amount of natural
atmospheric CO2?  
>  "…90% of additional warming…" - do they give data to explain this?  
>  Just curious.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * commieBob says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:51 pm

>>

>> Did they take plankton into account?

>>

>>> Published Thursday in the journal Science, the study details **a tenfold
increase** in the abundance of single-cell coccolithophores between 1965 and
2010, and a particularly sharp spike since the late 1990s in the population of
these pale-shelled floating phytoplankton. link

>>

>> That's Yuge!  
>  Plankton have an effect on clouds. They affect the climate. Are they a
positive feedback or a negative feedback?

>>  
>>                 >>                           * commieBob says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:17 pm

>>

>> Plankton cloud link

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Gabro says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:42 am

>>

>> If it be granted that more CO2 causes some warming, then they are a
negative feedback, since the clouds which they seed cool the surface.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:09 am

>>

>> Gabor, I don't know that CO2 seeds clouds.  
>  Clouds are two faced. During daytime they intercept sunlight and reflect it
back, giving them a cooling effect. At night they act like a blanket,
intercepting heat radiating from below and reflecting it back, giving them a
warming effect for the lower atmosphere.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * davidgmillsatty says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:40 pm

>>

>> @ Commie Bob:  
>  Don't tell Lief Svaalgard. Because Jasper Kirkby at CERN just proved that
GCR's cause biogenics to form cloud condensation nuclei. Lief still hates
Svensmark's hypothesis anyway. Lief has a sad. This will only make matters
worse for Lief.  
>  However, in Kirkby's announcement of CERN's findings, Kirkby made the odd
statement that most condensation nuclei are caused today not by biogenics but
by sulfuric acid which does not need GCR's to cause cloud condensation nuclei.  
>  How would Kirkby know that most of today's atmosphere is dominated by
sulfuric acid?  
>  Where was Kirkby's proof for that? Maybe in some polluted places. But the
entire earth? We haven't had acid rain in to speak of in North America for
quite some time. We have had a huge greening of the earth since 1985 due to
CO2 and a Yale study just reported we have three trillion trees instead of the
400 billion we had thought. Now we have plankton to add to the mix? I had
wondered about clouds forming over the ocean and bingo, you have the answer.  
>  Seems like biogenics are coming from all corners of the planet to create
clouds due to GCRs  
>  Thanks for a missing link (pun intended).

>>  
>>                 >>                         * BoyfromTottenham says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:12 pm

>>

>> Perhaps because the IPCC says (and NASA follows, for now at least) that
only 'human caused' GHG emissions matter to them - i.e. their charter only
requires them to consider 'anthropogenic' GHGs, so they infer that to mean
that they 'must' ignore any other sources, sinks and effects of GHGs on
'climate'. How convenient! More CAGW disinformation.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * jeanparisot says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 4:33 am

>>

>> So the plankton are consumers of specific isotopes of CO2; missed that
study - anyone have a link.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * rebelronin says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:29 pm

>>

>> "additional" means predicted but not yet observed  
>  it is in the process of being coaxed from it's hiding place by the
correction of data

>>  
>>                 >>                         * AndyG55 says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:52 pm

>>

>> "“…90% of additional warming…” "  
>  How can "warming" that mostly comes from artificial "adjustments" be
absorbed anywhere ????

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:34 pm

>>

>> They seem to have forgotten that there is a difference between their
delusions and the actual planet.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Hivemind says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:30 pm

>>

>> There hasn't been any warming, so we're going to claim the oceans took it?

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Leonard Lane says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:58 pm

>>

>> They seem to also forget that there are cold ocean currents at the ocean
surface. Guess these cold currents do not fit their conjectures.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Desitter says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 11:26 pm

>>

>> By mean of another adjustements and homogeneizations with invaluable
assistance of flawed computer models…IMO

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Ferdinand Engelbeen says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 1:43 am

>>

>> John Who,  
>  Natural CO2 emissions are more than compensated by natural sinks:  
>  - Seasonal changes, due to warming and cooling surface waters: ~50 GtC over
months as CO2 in and out.  
>  - Continuous changes, due to equatorial upwelling and polar sinks: ~40
GtC/year in and out.  
>  Both near completely depend of temperature changes / variability.  
>  Human emissions are independent of the temperature cycle/difference and
increase the CO2 pressure (pCO2) in the atmosphere. That pushes more CO2 into
the ocean surface (due to buffer chemistry, about 10% of the extra in the
atmosphere), supresses the CO2 release from the upwelling and increases the
deep ocean uptake at the poles.  
>  Current uptake is about half human emissions of which about 50/50 between
(deep) oceans and vegetation.  
>  A good oversight (with large margins of error and year by year
variability):  
>  https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/CarbonCycle/  
>  About heat absorption by the oceans and other components of the earth, see
Levitus e.a., Figure 3:  
>  http://junksciencearchive.com/Greenhouse/grlheat05.pdf

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Hugs says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:25 am

>>

>> Thanks Ferdinand again.

>>

>>> Over the last ten years, one-fourth of human-emissions of carbon dioxide
as well as 90 percent of additional warming due to the greenhouse effect have
been absorbed by the oceans.

>>

>> John asks "why only human emissions"?  
>  The above means the oceans are taking up more CO2 than giving it out, on
the average. And the sink rate appears to about one fourth of what humans
emit. Which I find probably underestimated, these papers so often have a
political bias or they are based on previous results that have political bias.
But that is nit-pick.  
>  So oceans sink so much CO2 if we'd drop human emissions by 75%, the
atmospheric CO2 would actually go down.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:48 am

>>

>> Hugs,  
>  Indeed, if humans would reduce their emissions to half what they are now,
emissions and sinks would be equal and CO2 levels would stay about the same.  
>  If that was possible to do without harming the economy. then there was no
problem at all, but nowadays the "green" movement wants to reduce CO2 whatever
the costs, for questionable result, while more CO2 seems to have more
benefits, with a small increase in temperature and a lot more plant growth,
than drawbacks…

>>  
>>                 >>                           * pmhinsc says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 8:02 am

>>

>> _**FerdiEgb** July 14, 2017 at 3:48 am  
>  "Indeed, if humans would reduce their emissions to half what they are now,
emissions and sinks would be equal and CO2 levels would stay about the same."_  
>  According to Law dome ice core data (also Siple), atmospheric CO2 has been
raising for 200 years prior to the mid 1900s when man began dumping large
amounts of CO2 into the atmosphere. Does the above comment imply the current
(i.e. land, water, atmosphere, sun, etc.) equilibrium atmospheric CO2 should
be between 300-400ppm? Does this also imply that without man's contribution
the earth would reach equilibrium sometime this century?

>>  
>>                 >>                           * pmhinsc says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 8:02 am

>>

>> _**FerdiEgb** July 14, 2017 at 3:48 am  
>  "Indeed, if humans would reduce their emissions to half what they are now,
emissions and sinks would be equal and CO2 levels would stay about the same."_  
>  According to Law dome ice core data (also Siple), atmospheric CO2 has been
raising for 200 years prior to the mid 1900s when man began dumping large
amounts of CO2 into the atmosphere. Does the above comment imply the current
(i.e. land, water, atmosphere, sun, etc.) equilibrium atmospheric CO2 should
be between 300-400ppm? Does this also imply that without man's contribution
the earth would reach equilibrium sometime this century?

>>  
>>                 >>                           * FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:01 am

>>

>> pmhinsc,  
>  Depends when human emissions did start in reality… Some see the early rise
mainly as the expanding of settled communities, larger towns, agriculture and
livestock farming… That also means more and more wood use, in the early days
one-way cutting without replacement, and clearing for livestock, thus land use
changes with extra CO2 release… Early industrial increase and use of coal was
already in 1750, but full expansion of the coal based steam engine was around
1850…  
>  For the current (weighted) average surface temperature, the dynamic
equilibrium ("steady state") between ocean surface and atmosphere would be
around 290 ppmv per Henry's law, where mainly oceanic CO2 sinks and sources
are more or less in equilibrium. 300-310 ppmv would already involve an extra
source.  
>  The observed decay rate for an extra increase of CO2 above steady state is
about 51 years e-fold rate, or about 35 years half life time. If human
emissions should cease today, after 35 years the current 400 ppmv would drop
to 235 ppmv, after 70 years gets 317.5 ppmv and after 105 years 304 ppmv… At 3
half times we are already back to the early 1900's…

>>  
>>                 >>                           * whiten says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 1:23 pm

>>

>> Ferdinand Engelbeen  
>  July 14, 2017 at 1:43 am  
>  "Over the last ten years, one-fourth of human-emissions of carbon dioxide
as well as 90 percent of additional warming due to the greenhouse effect have
been absorbed by the oceans.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Hello Ferd…Again.  
>  Now let me be fair first. My reply and argument to you is in the context of
the blog post in question here.  
>  Meaning that I have not checked the actual paper been in the spot light.  
>  But if by any chance the above selected statement is an actual claim and a
conclusion of that paper then I have to say that you do not even understand
the most basics of it, and this time around you not only in backward reasoning
and logic but you also in a backwards negative math approach….  
>  I do not think you understand the full implications of the above
statement…..  
>  As it stands, it actually says that the human or the anthropogenic forcing
according to the numbers and ratios given, it is completely insignificant and
mathematically meaningless .  
>  First of all, when claimed and stated that " one-fourth of human-emissions
of carbon dioxide have been absorbed by the oceans over the last ten years",
is as same and equal as claiming and stating that " one-fourth of yearly
human-emissions of carbon dioxide have been absorbed by the oceans every year
for each year during that ten years period"  
>  That claim and statement being put in the frame of ten years instead of
every year for that time period, is so put only due to the importance and
significance considered of the CO2 yearly emissions and GH warming in
coupling, where the addressing of the warming due to greenhouse effect in the
yearly manner will be quite "silly" so to speak….  
>  The other thing when it comes to the warming in question there is no any
actual quantifying of it, as far as I can tell…….So 90% of an ~0.1C for a
selected 10 year period is of no any real significance for the AGW, while
actually according to the data the whole warming that can be considered due to
greenhouse effect for the last 250 years is no more than 0.4C in a warming
trend of ~1.1-1.2C, ~1/3 of the whole experienced warming…..As with CO2 Flux,
so is with the heat content FLUX,,, it is not only how much it is absorbed
only, but it is also about how much it is emitted too for the same time period
in question, and the actual disbalance occurring…  
>  In the context the "numbers" given in the CO2 emissions and GH warming
coupling are very interesting indeed,  
>  For once, a 25% absorbing of the yearly CO2 anthropogenic emissions by the
oceans due to the yearly CO2 flux, it means if you look closely in any way
weighted that it is a number that claims or "confirms", the 5 year half life
residence time of CO2 in atmosphere….  
>  As the natural CO2 flux does not distinguish or "discriminates" between the
human or the natural yearly emissions of CO2, then, is easy to see that ~75%
of the natural CO2 every year ends up as a mass of CO2 concentration in the
atmosphere,  
>  Meaning that the refresh rate or the replenishment rate of the CO2 mass in
concentration is at ~10-12% in yearly bases…… a very "Strong" or a very
"Quick" one……making the anthropogenic CO2 emission impact on the CO2
concentration as non existent, even at the extent that it has reached in the
last ten years……….. completely meaningless……  
>  As there is no any data or evidence shown that the GH warming has ever
passed over and above 0.4C warming for the entire warming trend, there is no
any way to consider that the absorbing of any projected such warming from the
oceans during the last ten years consist as more that 90% of a 0.1C, and that
is at a stretch because there is another ten years previous to that that has a
so called missing GH warming, and as this things goes that is not actually
addressed because if the thermal Ocean-Atmosphere energy (or heat content)
flux considered than this kinda of decade GH warming absorbed can not be
considered incremental, meaning that the amount of GH warming absorbed in the
last 10 years is the same as for the last 20 years……Still ~0.1C, and so at
that amount it may stay for as long as you can imagine or dream about……  
>  Strange is it not it, Ferd…….!  
>  Please read this reply to you carefully before you may decide to follow
also with a reply to me….  
>  Another thing,,,,, don't know about others but to me it has been always
helpful and very supportive, when actually considering seriously that  
>  " when the numbers very rarely tell the truth, end even then in a relative
manner, still numbers if respected and addressed rightly, will never lie…so
when numbers may more than not fail to show the "truth" numbers if considered
seriously and with no biases more often than not will show you clearly what is
false and not true"  
>  "In their own numbers can not and will not ever lie"  
>  Cheers

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Ferdinand Engelbeen says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 2:39 am

>>

>> Whiten:  
>  _”one-fourth of human-emissions of carbon dioxide have been absorbed by the
oceans over the last ten years”, is as same and equal as claiming and stating
that” [is the same and equal to] one-fourth of yearly human-emissions of
carbon dioxide have been absorbed by the oceans every year for each year
during that ten years period”_  
>  Here you make an essential mistake: the removal of any extra CO2 (whatever
the cause) above the long term equilibrium per Henry 's law doesn't depend of
the emissions of one year. It depends of the total, accumulated extra CO2
pressure (pCO2) above the equilibrium and nothing else.  
>  That the long term absorption rate remained around 50% (total) of human
emissions is pure coincidence as result of human emissions which increased
quasi linear each year: a fourfold since 1960, so did the increase in the
atmosphere and so did the net sink rate. That gives that the "airborne
fraction" over the past 60 years remained about constant.  
>  If human emissions halved, then they would equal the sinks, thus no further
increase of CO2 in the atmosphere. If they dropped to zero, the CO2 levels in
the atmosphere would drop, until the long term equilibrium was reached again,
with a half life time of about 35 years.  
>  If one calculates the difference between yearly emissions and net sink
rate, one obtains the theoretical increase of CO2 in the atmosphere: that
nicely fits within the huge noise of the (12 month moving average) observed
CO2 rate of change:  
>  http://www.ferdinand-engelbeen.be/klimaat/klim_img/dco2_em6.jpg  
>  The noisy rate of change is caused by short-term temperature variability
which is leveling off to near zero in 1-3 years.  
>  _the refresh rate or the replenishment rate of the CO2 mass in
concentration is at ~10-12% in yearly bases…… a very “Strong” or a very
“Quick” one……making the anthropogenic CO2 emission impact on the CO2
concentration as non existent_  
>  Any bookkeeper calculating only the incomes and forgetting the expenses
would not keep his job for long: all what you have done is adding the
emissions and forgetting the sinks.  
>  Without human emissions, seasonal oceanic CO2 emissions are around 50 GtC
and seasonal oceanic sinks are around 50 GtC: zero change after a full
seasonal cycle. That forms - together with the opposite cycle in vegetation -
the 5 year residence time. That doesn't change the total amount of CO2 in the
atmosphere with one gram.  
>  Human (and volcanic) emissions add extra CO2: more CO2 pressure: less
(oceanic) emissions, more sinks. In the current case the removal of the extra
CO2 (half life time about 35 years) is slower than the addition by humans,
thus CO2 keeps increasing. That is the full balance…  
>  For the effect on warming, again one need to take into account the total
increase of CO2 in the atmosphere. The absorption of outgoing IR was measured
by satellites and the back radiation by CO2 was measured by a few ground
stations. The theoretical effect of that is known, the real effect is much
smaller: the warming of the oceans is only a fraction of what can be expected
from the ~2 W/m2 which should have warmed them. So other -natural cooling-
factors have a larger effect than the extra warming by CO2…

>>  
>>                 >>                           * whiten says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 6:27 am

>>

>> Ferdinand Engelbeen  
>  July 15, 2017 at 2:39 am  
>  Whiten:  
>  ”one-fourth of human-emissions of carbon dioxide have been absorbed by the
oceans over the last ten years”, is as same and equal as claiming and stating
that” [is the same and equal to] one-fourth of yearly human-emissions of
carbon dioxide have been absorbed by the oceans every year for each year
during that ten years period”  
>  Here you make an essential mistake:

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Ferdinand, are you trying to prove my point that you are dealing in
backwards and "negative" math, or are you trying a say that you do not accept
and find essentially mistaken the numbers given by NASA-MIT modeling in
question???…….because your own understanding and the estimation of the CO2
Flux-concentration has to be considered correct and superior to this NASA-MIT
approach……  
>  As far as I can tell, it is clearly not me who has come up with ocean
absorbing ratios, either for human CO2 emission or the GH warming.  
>  And still the fact mathematically can not be changed. If the oceans absorb
25% of of 10 years human CO2 emissions, the oceans do absorb 25% of yearly
human CO2 emission for each and every one of these 10 years, meaning also that
the yearly absorbed of the overall natural emissions is at ~25%, meaning also
that the yearly amount of overall emissions making it to CO2 concentration is
at ~75% of the yearly CO2 emissions, which leads to the conclusion that 10-12%
of CO2 mass concentrated in the atmosphere is refreshed or replenished yearly.  
>  Same yearly ratio you get from a 5 year half life residence time of CO2 in
the atmosphere.  
>  That shows a very strong impact of the CO2 flux into the CO2
concentration…..  
>  This NASA-MIT approach and method is definitely more superior than yours or
any one previously because it relies in the "tracer", human co2 emission, to
estimate the "translation" and the impact of the CO2 flux into the CO2
concentration, where the human CO2 emissions are much easy and correctly
estimated than the natural emissions, and also any errors there will have very
very little impact on the estimations, as the human versus natural emissions
is very small.  
>  To be continued if you still interested…….got some 'emergency..:)

>>  
>>                 >>                           * whiten says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 8:37 am

>>

>> Ferdinand Engelbeen  
>  July 15, 2017 at 2:39 am  
>  Whiten:  
>  the refresh rate or the replenishment rate of the CO2 mass in concentration
is at ~10-12% in yearly bases…… a very “Strong” or a very “Quick” one……making
the anthropogenic CO2 emission impact on the CO2 concentration as non existent  
>  Any bookkeeper calculating only the incomes and forgetting the expenses
would not keep his job for long: all what you have done is adding the
emissions and forgetting the sinks.Sorry because of the hurry, missed to
address the explanation about the "book keeping" you mention.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> First the mass of the 75% of the yearly overall emissions making it to
concentration, means that the other ~75% of the absorbing from the sinks, is
from the mass of the CO2 concentration, at ~10-12% of the concentration mass.
Aka,the refresh ratio or the replenishment of CO2 concentration ….  
>  Then, second, when considering that the emissions vary far much more
significantly than sinks, there will be a considerable variation of the CO2
concentration dependent in the CO2 emissions variation, The time periods when
the sinks are equal to the emissions, so to speak, is when there is the same
ratio of replenishment without a concentration variation, but these are very
short-transitory periods indeed when compared to the overall time period of
the variation.  
>  Besides to keep a simple clean book keeping, the refresh ratio as per
concentrations, the value was given in a range, and that range, 10-12%, and as
it stands can very much count for the CO2 concentration variation……  
>  No meaning to upset you but I still do very much indeed "envy" your book
keeping….. and your math….. 🙂  
>  Cheers

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Ferdinand Engelbeen says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 2:38 pm

>>

>> Whiten,  
>  That shows a very strong impact of the CO2 flux into the CO2 concentration…  
>  No, the refresh rate has zero impact on the CO2 concentration, no matter if
10 or 100 or 1000 GtC is exchanged with other reservoirs over the seasons…
Only the difference between all ins and all outs together does change the CO2
concentration in the atmosphere.  
>  It is like the turnover of goods - and thus capital - in a factory compared
to the gain or loss of the same factory at the end of the fiscal year. Two
totally different items. largely independent of each other.  
>  The main problem is that you don't see that different mechanisms are at
work: seasonal changes are temperature driven: as long as the temperature
change over the seasons is about the same, then about the same amount of CO2
is transferred in and out oceans and biosphere. Any extra CO2 injection in the
atmosphere doesn't change that. The extra CO2 pressure only changes the
balance between inputs (from the oceans) and outputs (both oceans and
vegetation). These two mechanisms are practically independent of each other.  
>  _First the mass of the 75% of the yearly overall emissions making it to
concentration_  
>  That doesn 't happen at all: about 60 GtC out and in is exchanged between
atmosphere and biosphere over the seasons. About 50 GtC in and out is
exchanged between atmosphere and ocean surface. At no point in the year there
is (60+50=) 110 GtC (~55 ppmv) extra present in the atmosphere, the maximum is
the difference: 10 GtC (~5 ppmv) between biosphere and ocean uptake/release,
as both work counter to each other with seasonal temperature changes. But even
the (global) +/- 5 ppmv level changes over the (mainly NH) globe get off to
near zero at the end of a full year. Thus (near) all of the increase of over 2
ppmv/year is from the 4.5 ppmv/year emissions from humans, not from the
seasonal CO2 movements…  
>  Thus again: the refresh rate has next to nothing to do with concentration
changes over longer periods (one year for seasonal changes, 1-3 years for
natural variability).  
>  _when considering that the emissions vary far much more significantly than
sinks_  
>  Wrong again: the variability is in the sinks, not the sources: mainly the
influence of temperature on oceans and tropical vegetation (Pinatubo, El
Niño). The latter is even a net CO2 source by (too) warm temperatures and
drought during an El Niño period …  
>  As the only overall net source over the past 60 years, human emissions,
shows little year by year variability, most variability is in the sinks,
driven by temperature (and rain patterns).

>>  
>>                 >>                           * whiten says:

>>  
>>

>> July 16, 2017 at 7:49 am

>>

>> Ferdinand Engelbeen  
>  July 15, 2017 at 2:38 pm  
>  Ferdinand……you are really a desperate case…….very very desperate one…..so
desperate that you are not even in the Planet B of Nay.  
>  You are in your own B Universe………..Universe B of Engelbeen…..  
>  Sorry for saying that but you are completely backwards with the rationale
and math in your arguments, to such a bad point that it really becomes
ridiculous to keep having an argument with you…….  
>  You can not even understand why in this study everything is been outside
the actual metric quantifying and tightly related to the sinks , either in the
case of CO2 or heat content, when GCMs versus reality considered…………..Oh
probably because the sinks and their variation have nothing to do either with
the CO2 atmospheric concentration or the atmospheric heat content variation….  
>  The other thing that you fail to understand is, that if the CO2 Flux is as
strong as shown by this study, then any other flux either in CO2 or Heat
content from the earth hard surface is and becomes entirely insignificant when
compared to the ocean-atmosphere one, including the bio mass and human CO2
emissions………also in that regard the actual CO2 concentration increment of 120
ppm for the last 150 years is well withing the natural range and is projected
to still be with in it for at least another further 80-100 ppm increase,
before some one like you can start contemplating that it is becoming
"unprecedented"……  
>  Also what you have to consider carefully is that in this study the CO2 Flux
is considered in a very tight connection and link to the thermal Flux…  
>  If you dislike and have a problem with this NASA-MIT study, which is
clearly based in the "experiment", and tries to make a connection between the
experiment and nature through the "Tracers", the CO2 human emissions and the
GH warming, then please do clearly state so, and stop trying to argue against
that study by using me as a passage, and stop claiming that I am wrong when
actually almost all your argument about wrong seems very clearly to be about
and aimed at the study in question,,,,,,,, please do have some guts for once,
if you have to question the authority of this NASA-MIT, please stop hiding
your self behind me and my understanding of that study……and state your
objections clearly towards the actual target meant….  
>  One more thing,,,,, the human CO2 emissions, the tracer, does not depend
and conforms to Henry's Law, I think…….. and while the ratio of it's sinking
may or may not have to do with that law, still in the context of this study is
estimated by the GCM experimental simulation…..and it is taken as a GCM
related result, regardless what actual processes carried in that simulation…..  
>  So if you think that you and your hypothesis and backward rationale-math
still at this point could be considered as superior in this aspect towards
this NASA-MIT study, please do make this clear so we do not keep arguing past
each other…………Unless that is what your actual aim and goal is….  
>  cheers

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Ferdinand Engelbeen says:

>>  
>>

>> July 16, 2017 at 12:26 pm

>>

>> Whiten,  
>  I have very little problems with the NASA-MIT study, I only have problems
with your misinterpretation of this study's meaning…  
>  It is quite simple: every housewife (there are exceptions…) with a very
tight to very specious budget knows that no matter how much you have in your
pocket at the beginning of the day/week/month: if you spent more than what you
start with, you are in trouble…  
>  Like in this case: it doesn't matter how much CO2 is cycling in and out the
atmosphere: at the end of the year, over a full seasonal cycle, all what
counts is what ends as plus or minus in the atmosphere. That is already 60
years less than what humans emitted in the same year. Thus humans are (near)
fully responsible for the increase in the atmosphere, no matter how much CO2
circulates: about half of human emissions (as mass) is absorbed by oceans and
vegetation. Of which about half by the oceans. That is all this study says.
Thus the oceans are a net sink for CO2, not the cause of the increase, no
matter how much CO2 goes in and out the oceans over the seasons within a year…  
>  Again: _how much CO2 circulates within a year between the atmosphere and
other reservoirs is not of the slightest interest for what remains in the
atmosphere at the end of the year or for the radiation budget_

>>  
>>                 >>                           * whiten says:

>>  
>>

>> July 16, 2017 at 3:12 pm

>>

>> Ferdinand Engelbeen  
>  July 16, 2017 at 12:26 pm  
>  Whiten,  
>  I have very little problems with the NASA-MIT study, I only have problems
with your misinterpretation of this study’s meaning…  
>  It is quite simple: every housewife (there are exceptions…) with a very
tight to very specious budget knows that no matter how much you have in your
pocket at the beginning of the day/week/month: if you spent more than what you
start with, you are in trouble…

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Ha ha, you are resolving now to "pot on a stove" kinda of explanations now
to explain and uphold your point and "scientific" understanding of this
particular matter…….and yours, the above one, is even worse than the "pot on
the stove" one….:)  
>  And this claim of yours is a beautiful example to show how backwards your
reasoning and logic is, also your math :  
>  "about half of human emissions (as mass) is absorbed by oceans and
vegetation. Of which about half by the oceans. Of which about half by the
oceans. That is all this study says."

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> First, that is not all what this study says, as it clearly says that only
25% of human emissions are absorbed by the Oceans, meaning that ~25% of the
overall emissions is absorbed by the Oceans.  
>  You seem to be blind mathematically, that when you try to increase the
absorb ratio to 50% for the human emissions by including and invoking
vegetation or whatever else, the absorb ratio, or the sink ratio for the
overall CO2 emissions does not increase much, by considering the such means
and invocations,, as the human versus overall emissions is at the very least
10 times smaller. So you get a very little change in sink ratio to the overall
emissions when you would invoke the whole possible sinks there. That actually
what this numbers give.  
>  Second that kind of arbitrary increase from 25% to 50% by trying to invoke
vegetation, still makes the case of the human emissions even more silly,and
weak as of any significant forcing……….you just lost another 25% human CO2
there without a dent in the overall natural CO2 emissions and its flux,, lost
more of human CO2 forcing, with no any dent in the CO2 natural flux, without
even realizing it.  
>  That is what considered as the effect of a strong CO2 flux..::)  
>  Any mathematical cheap acrobatics will definitely backfire, as there is
very very little room for such as acrobatics if the CO2 flux is or happens to
be as powerful as given by this study  
>  The "strength" of the CO2 flux is very important and makes a huge
difference when trying to asses the possible human impact on it and on to the
CO2 concentration…….  
>  According to ratio numbers .given by this study, the Human effect in the
CO2 flux and the CO2 atmospheric concentration ends up as non existent…….  
>  Again that is what the strength or the "'power" of the natural CO2 flux
does show, and that is why is so important, and very much
interesting……..contrary though to your liking…..  
>  cheers

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Ferdinand Engelbeen says:

>>  
>>

>> July 17, 2017 at 12:41 am

>>

>> Whiten,  
>  You really don't know where you are talking about…  
>  If NASA/MIT says that about 25% of human emissions (as mass, not the
original molecules) is absorbed, that does mean that the overall sink capacity
is equivalent to 25% of human emissions, whatever drives the sinks.  
>  Your interpretation then is that natural sinks get most of ALL emissions
(natural and human together) out of the atmosphere, where human emissions are
only a tiny fraction.  
>  No way. That is not what this study says. At no place in the study, they
point to the total emissions, as that is completely irrelevant for the removal
of any extra CO2 into the atmosphere: the removal of seasonal emissions is
(near) completely caused by temperature changes, the removal of any extra CO2
(volcanoes, humans) is (near) only caused by pressure changes. Two different
mechanisms with little connection to each other.  
>  Take a fountain where 1,000 l/min is blown in the air and falls back into
the basin under the fountain. Someone opens the supply valve, adding 1 l/min
of fresh water to the basin. After some time, he measures the increase of the
water level in the basin, and concludes that the increase is about 50% of what
he added via the supply. The rest probably evaporated or was lost by dropping
outside the fountain.  
>  It doesn't matter at all if the circulating water flow was 100 or 1,000 or
10,000 l/min, the result of the supply valve would be (near) the same… And if
he forgot to close the valve, the basin would certainly overflow, even if 1
l/min is only 1% or 0.1% or 0.01% of the circulating waters…  
>  That is about what this study has done: looking at the fate of human
emissions, regardless of natural CO2 fluxes.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * whiten says:

>>  
>>

>> July 18, 2017 at 1:23 pm

>>

>> Ferdinand Engelbeen  
>  July 17, 2017 at 12:41 am  
>  Ferdinand…..  
>  I am really sorry, but I do not think that I should continue further with
you in this argument. (or probably any other in the future)  
>  It would be easy for me to excuse my self by simply saying that you have
ended up to trolling.  
>  But I do not think that is the reality in this case.  
>  I think more like in the lines of you completely losing your intellectual
coherence at this point…..;for not saying worse….  
>  I told you, I think, from my first reply to you to really carefully read
and consider my replies and comments to you, before you would "engage",
something that you may very much have ignored, as it seems.  
>  In your last reply to me you even go so far as to tell me about my own
point made, about what I actually meant and tried to argue and explain to you,
by portraying it in your own version and according to your own liking, very
backwards, perverse and in the actual opposite of what I in my own meant and
tried to brink as a line of argument….. in very very a messy and incoherent
manner!  
>  Wondering why!  
>  Whatever "gibberish" you tried in your last reply to me, especially when
you try to describe what I did mean or what was my point in the other previous
arguments and comments to you, shows that you really have a problem………..  
>  Few comments later and few days later, and you end up going backwards and
perverse with me, with my own line of argument and may point made.  
>  "I do not think I said or argued or made a point in my earlier comments to
you any where near or in a "coherently" backwards manner as described and
portrayed by you, in your last reply to me……What do you think!"  
>  cheers

>>  
>>                 >>                         * darrowfarms says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:26 am

>>

>> I call "horse puckey" on the entire paper and will gladly list a few
points:  
>  1: Using static locations for measuring the temperature of the current near
Greenland, observing an increased temperature over time period X, and
concluding slowing conveyor action is shortsighted. I am having a difficult
time imagining ocean water still giving up equatorial heat sinking beneath
Arctic water just a calm night away from freezing. The shortsightedness of the
MIT observations is that this gradient/density point is a dynamic data set.
The point at which the Gulf Stream waters sink or become well mixed…. (segue:
Why is the Gulf Stream sinking at Greenland and not bathing Western Europe and
the U.K. in its warmth anymore? Wow! I missed something.) …will depend on the
cacophony of expected factors such as water density due to salinity/TDS,
temperature, storminess, loop currents/gyres, cloudiness,
upwelling/downwelling (forced downwelling), and others I am not considering at
this moment.  
>  2: A brief thoughts on the vertical circulation I would point out are the
critical importance played by influences of both salinity and temperature on
the density of water.  
>  During the Arctic melt season, the input of fresh water from floating ice
and land runoff has an observable and significant impact on the density of the
surface layers of Arctic region seawater. Would this not have an observable
impact on the point of forced redirection of the warmer and saltier waters
either vertically or horizontally?  
>  Conversely, during the freeze up periods hypersaline waters are sinking and
must also be considered in our thought experiment.  
>  3: I like to use the crude analogies of a naturally circulated utility
boiler and a styrofoam cup with a warm liquid containing neutrally buoyant
particles to demonstrate and discuss heat circulation/loss in water.  
>  As the power boiler is a long discussion, my thumbs are cramping, and
animals are hungry… the cup will suffice.  
>  As an eight year old many decades ago, while making mint jelly under the
direct tutelage of my mother, we watched the steeping hot mint purée slowly
"turning over" in a big insulated cup. The purée was losing heat at the
surface and sinking down the center of the cup, while the warmer purée rose
along the sidewalls. I suppose due to my age and curiosity it is a visual and
olphactory memory that I recall when the physical explanation made sense, or I
eat lamb. Enough of the W.E.'ish memory walk.  
>  Last remark on vertical circulation: watching the satellite visible/color
observation of the seasonal plankton blooms reminds me of the circulation,
striations, fascination, and mesermerization of a water utility
coagulation/precipitation unit (clarifier). The coagulated particles flow with
the currents in the water, bunch, settle, the character changes the further
you move from the mixer and the overall density of zones of the clarifier
changes due to the co-precipitation of both suspended and dissolved solids. Do
these MIT and NASA scientists adequately account for the upwelled nutrients
and gasses (why would we not consider CO2 to be a nutrient? Why do they even
bother to mention nitrogen in the paper?) and the subsequent downwelling? Have
they attempted a mass balance of the Si, Ca, Fe, Mg, S, PO4, or K? Are we so
blinkered by C, we can't consider another nutrient, then do a bit of math to
establish a mass balance ratio? This may be a good point of reference as an
accuracy check.  
>  Off to feed the chickens which are loudly proclaiming my tardiness.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:58 am

>>

>> John - it's just the imprecision of language. You were expected to
understand that they meant 'a fraction of the total CO2 representing 25% of
human emitted CO2'.  
>  I think bias towards a foregone conclusion probably led you to not see that
- that's something we all have to guard against.

>>  
>>                 >>                       2. Brian Bingham says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:17 pm

>>

>> where is the data that supports the computer models?

>>  
>>                 >>                         * John of Cloverdale, WA,
Australia says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:57 pm

>>

>> Data. Shush!

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Bill Illis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:54 pm

>>

>> The oceans are absorbing about one-quarter of human CO2 emissions and about
90% of the actual energy being absorbed by the Earth. So, the basic statements
are correct.  
>  Now 90% of the energy is still only about one-third of that originally
expected in the climate models and it is only about one-tenth of the total
energy that is supposed to be there from GHGs and feedbacks.  
>  So, it is more that 90% of the energy is missing and of the 10% that is
showing up, 9% is going into the oceans and 1.0% is going into heating the
atmosphere/land and melting ice.  
>  Plants are absorbing another 25% of our emissions so, combined with the
ocean, the net absorption rate is close to 50%.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:35 pm

>>

>> All those numberz make my head start spinnin'!  
>  O

>>  
>>                 >>                           * John Harmsworth says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 9:21 am

>>

>> I found it interesting that no mention was made of any heat escaping to
space. Since this is the final destination of all heat that visits planet
Earth I feel it is important to recognize heat loss in any evaluation of
warming. "Additional " warming, in fact leads directly to additional cooling.
We require constant warming from the sun precisely because the game is rigged
against us in this way. But according to the AGW theory, heat escape is a
constant. This clearly incorrect preconception, plus the obvious determination
to not find any potential negative feedback mechanisms, allows the fantasy of
AGW to exist. Like the bogeyman, it is terrifying until you look under the
bed.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Stephen Skinner says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:51 am

>>

>> "Today's scientists have substituted mathematics for experiments, and they
wander off through equation after equation, and eventually build a structure
which has no relation to reality".  
>  Nikola Tesla

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Samuel C Cogar says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 9:25 am

>>

>> Stephen Skinner, you did super great.  
>  Your posting of that quote attributed to Nikola Tesla was absolutely,
positively appropriate …….. and “right-on-the-money” ……. given all the
previous postings that employed “fuzzy” mathematics as their means to crunch
and manipulate the guesstimated numerical quantities in futile attempts to
offer “proof and reason” to a various collection of climate related “pet
theories”.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:24 am

>>

>> Stephen,  
>  Tesla's relationship with reality was pretty dodgy.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * ATheoK says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:16 pm

>>

>>> "Jack Davis July 14, 2017 at 11:24 am  
>  Stephen,  
>  Tesla’s relationship with reality was pretty dodgy."

>>

>> And that absurd vague ad hominem serves what purpose?  
>  Likely to distract the conversation and minimize Tesla and Tesla quotes.  
>  Tesla led a brilliant and extremely productive life.

>>  
>>                 >>                       3. Rob Dawg says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:17 pm

>>

>>> These results from the computer models of the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation are one of the many moving parts that come together in
global climate models.  
>  What a disappointment. I thought I was reading about science.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Wally says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:19 pm

>>

>> This is the 25th anniversary of the publication of Al Gore’s book 'Earth in
the Balance', in which the then-senator called for eliminating the internal
combustion engine by 2017 or all hell would set loose.  
>  So ,,,,

>>  
>>                 >>                       4. Russ R. says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:19 pm

>>

>> A thought experiment for my NASA/MIT friends. I have an indoor swimming
pool, that has a heat capacity 1000x times the heat capacity of air in the
facility. Both the pool temperature and the air temperature are the same. My
swimmers complain it is too cold, so I turn on the heat system and raise the
air temp by 5 degrees. How much will that raise the temp of the water?  
>  Next I find that my pool heating system is failing to keep the pool at a
warm enough temp, so I install a clear membrane that allows the sun to shine
into the pool during the day. That raises the temperature of the water. Do you
think it would raise the temperature of the air in the facility as well, all
other things being equal?  
>  All the atmosphere can do is slow down the release of heat from the oceans
to space. Now that does have a small effect on the equilibrium temperature of
the oceans, and the atmosphere, but it does not really change the heat going
into the oceans in the first place. That is where the convoluted logic, that
is being used to "find the missing heat", goes off the rails.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * goldminor says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:33 pm

>>

>> +10

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:23 pm

>>

>> If you started with the water in the pool being signicantly colder than the
air, before long the air and water would be about equal in temperature and the
water wouldn't be much changed.  
>  If you then heated the air for a couple of hundred years, the pool water
would be unfit for tropical fish.  
>  "All the atmosphere can do is slow down the release of heat from the oceans
to space."  
>  Yes, and that is exactly what the excess carbon we are pumping into the
atmosphere is doing. The heat that would normally be radiated back to space is
held within the atmosphere and transferred to the ocean. We didn't really
notice it for the first couple of hundred years, but now the situation is
forcing itself upon us and we should do something about it.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Sandy In Limousin says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:18 am

>>

>> Jack Davis  
>  As regards "the pool water would be unfit for tropical fish" check out the
Eocene Climate Optimum. You can read reports that the seas were teeming with
fish and that the sea surface temperature in some places may have reached
40'C.  
>  When it comes to reversing Climate Change it seems to me reversing it to
the Eocene Climate Optimum might be good. Global temperatures 10′ greater than
now and much higher levels of CO2. It is also worth reading about the mass
extinction event at the end of the Eocene when the climate cooled
significantly and ice sheets started developing.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Magoo says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:50 am

>>

>> By what mechanism is heat transferred to the ocean from the atmosphere?  
>  The heat in the atmosphere can act as insulation to slow heat loss from the
ocean, but by what means does atmospheric heat that only penetrates a
millimeter or so into the surface of a turbulent, rough, evaporating ocean
surface warm the ocean?  
>  This is the mechanism that is never explained by anyone (including the
iPCC), yet we are expected to accept it without a method of how it’s supposed
to happen. It sounds like an unsubstantiated, desperate attempt at fobbing off
a lack of atmospheric warming for the past 2 decades more than anything else.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * MarkW says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:57 am

>>

>> We've only been pumping large amounts of CO2 into the atmosphere for about
70 years. Not several hundred.  
>  Regardless, so freaking what?

>>  
>>                 >>                           * MarkW says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:58 am

>>

>> Magoo, conductance.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * John Harmsworth says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 9:42 am

>>

>> You are missing a critical fact, Jack. The atmosphere doesn't only slow the
cooling of the water. It aso facilitates it! The weather locally and globally
is a heat engine. Adding more heat just speeds it up! There has been life in
the oceans for 4 billion years! CO2 has often been many times higher than it
is now.  
>  The warming we saw in the late 20th century was very minor, it was
beneficial and it appears to have ended. These three simple FACTS refute the
entirety of AGW theory and the purpose for the existence of the IPCC. They
sought to stop mankind's progress and leave billions in ignorance and poverty.
It cannot be allowed!

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Samuel C Cogar says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 9:59 am

>>

>> @ Jack Davis July 13, 2017 at 10:23 pm

>>

>>> “ _[quoting Russ R. - July 13, 2017 at 6:19 pm]

>>>

>>>> “ _“All the atmosphere can do is **slow down the release of heat** from
the oceans **to space**.”_ ”

>>>

>>> Yes, and that is exactly what **the excess carbon we are pumping into the
atmosphere is doing**. _ ”

>>

>> BUT, ….. but, ….. but, ….. Jack Davis, …….. the excess carbon we are
pumping into the atmosphere in desert locales, ……… such as are located in the
southwest USA, in the states of Arizona, New Mexico and Death Valley in
California, ……. **don’t slow down one damn bit** , …… the release of surface
heat back into space from which it came.  
>  Care to explain that, Jack?

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Russ R. says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:50 am

>>

>> When I dive in the ocean the deeper I go, the darker it gets and the colder
the water is. The upper layers are absorbing warmth from the sun, not the
atmosphere. The only time it is colder above is when the water is loosing heat
to the cold atmosphere. That is why water freezes from the surface down, not
from the bottom up. Water has a large capacity to warm the air above it,
because heat rises, and water has a higher density, and greater heat capacity
than air. Air has a very low capacity to heat the colder water below it. The
tropical sun heats the oceans, and to a lesser degree the mid-latitude sun.
The polar sun barley penetrates the surface of the water, for most of the
year.  
>  The atmosphere is warmed as the oceans release that heat to space. There is
no guarantee that the oceans will give up the heat, in a continuous stream in
direct proportion to incoming heat. The Pacific is a vast heat pump, and
sometimes it is storing heat, and sometimes it is releasing it, and that is
why the climate varies. It has been going on for millennia and will continue
to do so. Climate change politics has nothing to do with the actual climate.
It is not about the Gulf Stream or the Jet Stream. It is about controlling the
Energy Revenue Stream.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:35 am

>>

>> Samuel Cogar - nothing to explain - the CO2 in the atmosphere does absorb
heat radiated back from deserts. It still gets cold at night in the desert -
we're talking effects noticeable on a timescale of decades.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:42 am

>>

>> John Harmsworth,  
>  I'm not ignoring that, and it's my answer to Magoo - the air and the ocean
are in constant exchange of heat - it's a very turbulent system, as anyone
ever caught in a storm will attest.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Michael darby says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:50 am

>>

>> Jack Davis, you say: "we’re talking effects noticeable on a timescale of
decades." You are correct, and they've even **measured** this effect:
https://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v519/n7543/full/nature14240.html

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Wayne Delbeke says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:59 pm

>>

>> What excess carbon? It was there before natural processes sequestered it.
Who says it is "excess"? Looks about right to me given how well those
Carboniferous plants and plankton must have been doing a few million years
ago. Excess to what?  
>  Looks like opinion, not science.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * naturbaumeister says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 1:54 pm

>>

>> Sunlight comming down to the surface meets mostly water (2/3) and heats it.
Vegetated land has 1000 times more heat capacity than air. Water has five
times more heat capacity than vegtated land.  
>  So you can just look at the oceans to see whats going on. The rest is
peanuts.  
>  Water at a certain temperature will radiate a certain amount of energy
towards space. Clouds and the so-called greenhouse gasses will dampen this
effect a bit.  
>  Hotter air will cause more convection, ergo more heat tranfer towards top
of atmosphere, where it will be radiiated towards space. Means more cooling.
Hurricanes and cyclones are the extreme sort of convection, keeping the Ocean
surface below 30°C maximum.  
>  Hotter water and air will cause more evaporation. Means more clouds. Clouds
are protecting the surface from beeing heated up.  
>  ENSO (El Nino/La Nina) is the extreme kind of heat release from water to
the atmosphere. It releases this much heat, that it affects the atmosphere for
some months.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Magoo says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 5:01 pm

>>

>> MARKW:  
>  'Conductance' is the theory of how heat gets from the atmosphere into the
ocean, but in reality it doesn't wash. The warmth from the atmosphere only
warms the top millimeter or so, which will quickly be expelled by both
evaporation and turbulence on the ocean surface - there's no way it can warm
the ocean to depths more than a millimeter or so.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Magoo says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 5:06 pm

>>

>> JACK DAVIS:  
>  'it’s my answer to Magoo – the air and the ocean are in constant exchange
of heat – it’s a very turbulent system, as anyone ever caught in a storm will
attest.'  
>  The air can only really transfer heat to the ocean during La Ninas. The
warmth from the atmosphere only warms the top millimeter or so, which will
quickly be expelled by both evaporation and turbulence on the ocean surface.
The chances of any warming below the immediate surface as a result of a warm
atmosphere are nil.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Michael darby says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 5:29 pm

>>

>> Magoo, if you knew anything about thermodynamics, and the flow of heat, you
would know that heat will flow from air to water if the temperature of the air
is higher than the temperature of the water. It doesn't matter at akk one
stinking millimeter, the direction of flow is always from warm to cold.
PERIOD. Nothing you can post can refute this fact of reality.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Magoo says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:00 pm

>>

>> MICHAEL DARBY:  
>  Try warming your bath up by blowing warm air on the surface with a
hairdryer whilst stirring the bath, see how much it warms.  
>  Where does the heat go when the surface of the ocean evaporates, back to
the atmosphere? The more you heat, the more it evaporates.  
>  Where does the heat go when you stir a pot of boiling water and it ceases
boiling momentarily? Guess what happens to the heat in the top millimeter of
the ocean when the ocean is churned up with swells of a metre or more. Bye,
bye surface heat.  
>  Heat can be transferred into the water from the atmosphere, but that
doesn't mean it will stay there. Surface temperature is different from deeper
warming - heat stored 2 kilometers down isn't expelled as easily as that in
the top millimeter during rough surface conditions.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 8:10 pm

>>

>> There is a better example than bathtubs.  
>  Swimming pools.  
>  As anyone who has one knows, one cold night will cool of a pool by more
than a week of blazing sun and hot temps can add back in.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Samuel C Cogar says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 5:06 am

>>

>> A recap, Sam C queried:

>>

>>> “ _Jack Davis, …….. the excess carbon we are pumping into the atmosphere
in desert locales, **don’t slow down one damn bit** , the release of surface
heat back into space from which it came. …….. Care to explain that, Jack?_ ”

>>

>> Jack D responded to the above query: July 14, 2017 at 11:35 am

>>

>>> “ _Samuel Cogar – nothing to explain – the CO2 in the atmosphere does
absorb heat radiated back from deserts. It still gets cold at night in the
desert – **we’re talking effects noticeable on a timescale of decades**. _ ”

>>

>> Jack Davis, there is no scientific evidence or historically recorded
records that proves the daytime near-surface temperatures in the desert
southwest have been **gradually warming up** (increasing) during the past 150+
years (15+ decades) ……… even though atmospheric CO2 ppm **has increased 120
ppm** (280 to 404 ppm).  
>  And Jack D, there is also **no scientific evidence or historically recorded
records** that proves the nighttime near-surface temperatures in the desert
southwest have been **gradually warming up** during the past 150+ years (15+
decades) ……… even though atmospheric CO2 ppm has increased 120 ppm (280 to 404
ppm).  
>  So, I’m asking you, Jack Davis, ….. just who in the hell is it, or was it,
**that has been noticing or noticeable of those “warming effects” on a
timescale of decades**?

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Michael darby says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 6:33 am

>>

>> Magoo, when warm moist air hits a cold body of water, the moisture in the
air condenses onto the surface of the water transferring heat to the water.
You've seen morning dew on land, it's the same process. The problem is that
you can't see the dew condensing onto the water.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Magoo says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 5:25 pm

>>

>> MICHAEL DARBY:  
>  The problem with your dew theory is that the ocean surface is usually
warmer than the air & land at night, as the ocean releases the warmth that it
has stored from the sun at a slower rate.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * I Came I Saw I Left says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 4:23 am

>>

>> I actually do have an indoor pool that is enclosed in an uninsulated metal
building with no windows to allow sunlight to heat the water. The pool is
above ground and insulated, so there is only heat loss to the ground at the
bottom of the pool. The air temp inside can get to 110 F (and above) easily in
the summer, but that does very little to raise the water temp. I also have a
rudimentary solar water heater consisting of a 100′ length of black poly tube
uncoiled outside that is connected to the pool pump. That can raise the pool
temp 4-5 degrees F in a day (to a point that I haven't determined yet). If I
leave the pump on during cool nights, the water temp will drop noticeably. If
I turn it off during the night, the same drop in temp doesn't occur.  
>  This tells me that a still body of water absorbs little heat from the air.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * I Came I Saw I Left says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 4:33 am

>>

>> I should have mentioned a phenomena that I didn't expect. I put a fan in
the building because I expected the humidity to go through the roof, so to
speak. The exact opposite occurred during the day. The humidity gets so low
during the day that the meter doesn't even register it, even though water is
dripping off of the ceiling in the morning. This shows that a lot of interior
heat during the day is going into evaporation rather than the body of pool
water itself.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * John Harmsworth says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 9:56 am

>>

>> I had a very similar set up. Something wrong with your rh readings there
though . Mine worked great in the spring to raise the water temp, but even at
100f I couldn't get the water above mid 70's. I just lost more water to
evaporation. I eventually made a heat exchanger to heat off my boiler.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * I Came I Saw I Left says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:37 am

>>

>> "Something wrong with your rh readings there though"  
>  Could be, but several units do the same thing. 60-70% rh in the morning and
then once the visible moisture is driven off they read "LO". There are many
air gaps at the corners of the building where the metal siding meets, plus
many screw holes in the faces of the metal panels (I bought it used). So the
only thing I can figure out is that the intense heat drives out the water
vapor faster through air flow than water evaporates from the pool. I can be in
there at 110 F and I can definitely feel it, but it's not like a humid 110 F.
It really is an unusual and unexpected outcome.  
>  Was your building sealed fairly well preventing air exchange with the
outside?

>>  
>>                 >>                           * John Harmsworth says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:06 pm

>>

>> Relative humidity is a measure of the moisture content of the air
"relative" to how much the air is able to hold. As air temperature rises, it
is able to hold much more air, therefore its relative humidity will go down,
even though the total or "absolute" humidity ( the actual number of molecules
of water in the air ) has not changed. If your hygrometer was more accurate,
as opposed to just reading "low", I think it would show that you still have a
relative humidity over 50%.  
>  When rh gets to 100%, you have condensation on any surface cooler than the
air temperature.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * old construction worker
says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 3:07 am

>>

>> What you are describing is how a swamp cooler works minus fans. Swamp
coolers are very inefficient in high humid areas such as Florida where as they
are very efficient in dry climates such as AZ.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 10:52 am

>>

>> Even Florida has a very long dry season during which time evaporative
cooling systems work just fine.

>>  
>>                 >>                       5. Anne Ominous says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:22 pm

>>

>> This looks to me like linear global extrapolation based on short-term,
local trends. Where have we seen this before?

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:27 pm

>>

>> "Where have we seen this before?"  
>  In Russia R's pool?

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:28 pm

>>

>> Russ - not Russia! Sorry - bloody predictive text!

>>  
>>                 >>                       6. JohnWho says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:25 pm

>>

>> “Most of the excess heat from climate change will go into the ocean
eventually, we think,” Romanou said. “Most of the excess chemical pollutants
and greenhouse gases will be buried in the ocean. But the truth is that the
ocean recirculates that extra load and, at some point, will release some of it
back to the atmosphere, where it will keep raising temperatures, even if
future carbon dioxide emissions were to be much lower than they are now.”  
>  And that future raising temperature will increase the CO2 levels in the
atmosphere which will again warm the ocean which will then warm the atmosphere
which will then warm the… whoa, I must be having a bad day, 'cause it sounds
like it will just continue until the oceans boil.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * goldminor says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:35 pm

>>

>> Perpetual motion is alive and well at MIT.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Hivemind says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:35 pm

>>

>> Love that: "we think". So this isn't an actual scientific paper, but just
the opinions of a couple of warmist shills?  
>  Thought so.

>>  
>>                 >>                       7. Horace Jason Oxboggle says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:31 pm

>>

>> When plants absorb CO2 molecules, those molecules leave the atmosphere,
don't they? If the oceans are also absorbing CO2, don't we risk a CO2 deficit?
Where am I going wrong?

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:02 am

>>

>> "Where am I going wrong?"  
>  Well, there's a fair amount of extra CO2 to play with:  
>  "According to the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), the world's volcanoes,
both on land and undersea, generate about 200 million tons of carbon dioxide
(CO2) annually, while our automotive and industrial activities cause some 24
billion tons of CO2 emissions every year worldwide."  
>  That's more than 100 times what volcanoes produce - produced by us!

>>  
>>                 >>                           * jaakkokateenkorva says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:06 am

>>

>> And how much does mankind know about the volcanos under the oceans? Sounds
like U.S. Geological survey is pulling figures out of their hat.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * siamiam says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 9:51 am

>>

>> The volcanoes have been doing it for over 4 billion years. So why aren't
the oceans boiling cauldrons of acid?

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Samuel C Cogar says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:10 am

>>

>> And Jack Davis, **termite colonies** world wide emit 10 times more CO2 each
year than humans do.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 1:56 am

>>

>> Horace,  
>  Most of the CO2 uptake by plants is recycled within a few months to a few
decades, when the plant dies or is eten as feed/food. Only what is stored in
more permanent layers (humus, peat, browncoal, coal) over many years is
removed out of the atmosphere.  
>  The same for the oceans: what sinks near the poles is mostly returned the
same year (in quantity, the original molecules need +/- 800 years…) by the
upwelling zones near the equator.  
>  In both cases, the extra CO2 pressure caused by human emissions caused a
little more (permanent) uptake than release by oceans and plants.  
>  That does go on until the "old" equilibrium between CO2 in the ocean
surface and the atmosphere is reached again. For the current average ocean
surface temperature, that is about 290 ppmv.  
>  For (C3 type) plants, already at the low side, 1000 ppmv and more are ideal
for that type of plants (all trees, most other plants).

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Hans-Georg says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:46 am

>>

>> This is only partially correct. The most absorbed CO2 of the individual
plant is returned to the atmosphere on medium-term time scales (except the
plankton sinking to the seabed), but in long-term time scales C is permanently
sequestrated by the build-up of a humus layer in the soil. And the thicker
this humus layer becomes the more. In addition, CO2 is permanently stored by
renewable wood or plant parts (if you look at it as a whole and do not fall
down on the individual plant). For example, old forests are not net CO2 sinks,
but they store C permanently when they remain in the stable state (regrowth of
the dead plants). Moreover, the increase in CO2 in the atmosphere also
improves the ability of the plants to absorb CO2 and a stable forest
management helps to store C permanently. If, of course, forests are burned,
they lose their ability to do so. For the formation of a humus layer as
described in the entry of my post, by the way, Grassland contributes much more
than the forest. So this is also important for the long-term storage of CO2.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 4:05 am

>>

>> Hans-Georg,  
>  Based on the oxygen (and δ13C) balance, the total seasonal carbon cycle is
about 60 GtC in and out within a full year, while the more permanent storage
is around 1 GtC/year (up to 2002) and around 2 GtC/year nowadays. That
includes the uptake by plankton organics, as these also use/produce oxygen.
The oxygen release / uptake by the ocean surface is accounted for as the
solubility of O2 in seawater with temperature is known, thus any extra release
is from bio-life in the oceans.  
>  As the ratio between CO2 uptake and the extra CO2 pressure in the
atmosphere above the ocean-atmosphere equilibrium of oceans + bio-life is
surprisingly linear over the past 50 years and the uptake by the oceans is
linear per Henry's law (with a small correction for the temperature increase),
the ratio between extra CO2 pressure in the atmosphere and the extra uptake by
plants in more permanent storage must be quite linear too…

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Bill Illis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 5:01 am

>>

>> I wouldn't call it linear Ferdinand.  
>  The net absorption rate has increased from 0 GTs to about 5.0 GTs expected
this year. It is rising as the amount of excess CO2 is rising. That rate is
about 1.8% of the excess above 280 ppm, but this rate might also be increasing
as well.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * WB Wilson says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:05 am

>>

>> FerdiEgb:  
>  "Only what is stored in more permanent layers (humus, peat, browncoal,
coal) over many years is removed out of the atmosphere."  
>  Don't forget the carbonates, Ferd. They probably out-mass peat and coal by
a wide margin.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Ferdinand Engelbeen says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:20 pm

>>

>> Bill Illis,  
>  I was surprised myself when I saw how linear the uptake was, while many of
the sink processes are far from linear (CO2 diffusion in plant alveoli - water
- organic chain reactions)…  
>  In 1959: 25 ppmv, 0.5 ppmv/year, 50 years, half life time 34.7 years  
>  In 1988: 60 ppmv, 1.13 ppmv/year, 53 years, half life time 36.8 years  
>  In 2012: 110 ppmv, 2.15 ppmv/year, 51.2 years or a half life time of 35.5
years.  
>  That looks very linear, even with a quadrupling of the extra CO2 pressure
in the atmosphere above steady state and widely within the borders of accuracy
of the emission inventories and natural sink capacity variability.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * ATheoK says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 1:57 pm

>>

>>> "Jack Davis July 14, 2017 at 12:02 am

>>>

>>>> “Where am I going wrong?”

>>>

>>> Well, there’s a fair amount of extra CO2 to play with:  
>  “According to the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), the world’s volcanoes,
both on land and undersea, generate about 200 million tons of carbon dioxide
(CO2) annually, while our automotive and industrial activities cause some 24
billion tons of CO2 emissions every year worldwide.”  
>  That’s more than 100 times what volcanoes produce – produced by us!

>>

>> Another desk bound short sighted estimate; aka useless.  
>  "Ms. Werner and her colleagues found that Yellowstone's Mud Volcano area
produced about 176,300 tons of carbon dioxide each year.  
>  Loosely expanding those figures based on the park's underlying geology,
they suggest that each year the entire park may emit about 44 million tons of
carbon dioxide, a colorless, odorless and incombustible gas."  
>  One mud volcano - 176,000+ tons per year.  
>  One volcanic area - 44 million tons per year.  
>  "Ash column generated by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo, a volcano in the
Philippines Luzon volcanic arc, on June 12, 1991. The climactic eruption of
Mount Pinatubo occurred three days later on June 15, 1991, and was one of the
largest eruptions of this century. The climactic event lasted about 9 hours
and erupted over a cubic mile of rock material. It injected a 20- million ton
sulfur dioxide cloud into the stratosphere to an altitude of more than 20
miles. "  
>  One 9 hour major volcano eruption - 20 million tons.  
>  **Currently active volcanoes:**  
>  **Name **___** ** ___** ** _Location_** ** ___ _ Activity**  
>  Bogoslof ****___** Fox Islands (USA) ** ___** _New  
>  Fuego **___** ** ___** **Guatemala ** ___** ** _New  
>  Rincon de la Vieja _** Costa Rica **___** ** ___ New  
>  Sheveluch ****___ Central Kamchatka (Russia) New  
>  Aira ****___** ** ___** Kyushu (Japan) **___** Ongoing  
>  Bezymianny **___ Central Kamchatka (Russia) ** Ongoing  
>  Cleveland **___** Chuginadak Island (USA) ** ___ Ongoing  
>  Copahue ** __Central Chile-Argentina border **__ Ongoing  
>  Dukono _****___** __Halmahera (Indonesia) **_Ongoing  
>  Ebeko _****___ _Paramushir Island (Russia) **** Ongoing  
>  Karymsky **___ _ Eastern Kamchatka (Russia) **_ Ongoing  
>  Kilauea **___** _Hawaiian Islands (USA) **___** Ongoing  
>  Klyuchevskoy **Central Kamchatka (Russia) ** __ Ongoing  
>  Nishinoshima _****___** Japan **___** ** ___** Ongoing  
>  Poas **___** ** ___** ** __ Costa Rica_** ** ___ _ Ongoing  
>  Sabancaya ****___** ** ___** Peru **___** ** __ Ongoing  
>  Santa Maria _****___** ** _Guatemala_** ** ___ _ Ongoing  
>  Sinabung ****___** ** ___** Indonesia **___**** Ongoing  
>  Turrialba **___** ** ___** _Costa Rica **___** __ Ongoing  
>  • These are solely the active magma volcanoes; e.g. Yellowstone is not
listed. Hundreds of volcanoes are simmering away and emitting volcanic gases.  
>  • There are a great number of active mud volcanoes.  
>  • There are far greater numbers of active hot springs and geysers.  
>  • Then there are many tens of thousand miles active rifts and volcanically
active faults; "ring of fire".  
>  Your estimate above is specious, at best.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 2:58 am

>>

>> ATheoK,  
>  The Pinatubo eruption, one of the largest of the previous century emitted a
lot of CO2 besides SO2, but its effect on the CO2 increase in the atmosphere
was negative: the temperature drop and the increase of photosynthesis due to
scattered sunlight (by the SO2/water drops in the stratosphere) had more
effect that the extra CO2…  
>  Several active volcanoes are actively followed, one of the most active is
mount Etna, Sicily, Italy:  
>  http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v351/n6325/abs/351387a0.html  
>  That is a subduction volcano, where the CO2 from the carbonate rock from
the sea bottom is recycled into the atmosphere. Deep magma volcanoes (Hawaii,
Iceland) and most arc volcanoes (mid-Atlantic rift) have much lower releases.
The latter -mostly- do not even reach the atmosphere and CO2 is already
absorbed in the enormous mass of C species in the deep oceans.  
>  Thus still, volcanic emissions are only a fraction of human emissions.
Moreover, there is no sign that volcanic emissions/eruptions increased over
time. Seems overall rather constant with stochastic peaks and calm periods…

>>  
>>                 >>                       8. JBom says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:35 pm

>>

>> "The world’s oceans are like brakes slowing down the full effects of
greenhouse gas warming of the atmosphere."  
>  Presumption without supportive evidence in the way of measurement or
observations! Court rules Inadmissible!  
>  Another Religious Preamble Fail from a "Pope Want-A-Be".  
>  BTW the Catholic Church has never admitted a woman to the Papacy and
neither with the Church Of The Anthropocene (An-flop-ocene) irrespective of
the "Old Girls Club" of the American Geophysical Union, American Meterological
Society, American Physical Society and the National Academies of Science -
Medicine - Engineering and the National Science Board and the NATIONAL SCIENCE
FOUNDATION.  
>  "Water water everywhere and not a drop to drink!" … heard after a FY18
budget hearing in Congress.

>>  
>>                 >>                       9. rvandoffroad says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:44 pm

>>

>> I'm not a smart man, usually, but if the ocean banks the excess heat and
the ocean is getting bigger because of the excess heat, wouldn't a bigger
ocean benefit the globally warming theory?

>>  
>>                 >>                         * KTM says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:50 pm

>>

>> Yes, and it should be evident as a marked acceleration of sea levels above
the long run trend, beginning with the advent of the CO2 Era in ~1950.  
>  This should be obvious in every tide gauge around the globe, and most
obvious in the longest records.  
>  Instead there is zero evidence of any marked change in sea level rise in
any tide gauge that begins in~1950. I can think of one single exception for a
tide gauge in the western pacific, who's trend change was caused by a strong
earthquake.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 9:07 pm

>>

>> These are climastrologists…they have never let actual real world
observations intrude into the fairly tales they spin so fancifully.

>>  
>>                 >>                       10. Joe says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 6:50 pm

>>

>> The oceans are two-thirds of earths surface, and it reflects less light
than land, hence 90% of what is not reflect is in the oceans, ok, that's fine.  
>  So why did this fail to prevent warming between 1970 to 1990s, then what
changed from 2000 to present, when it suddenly decided to hide the missing
heat deep?  
>  I am sure the explanation was written down, unfortunately their dog ate the
homework?

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Wally says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:22 pm

>>

>> They're trying to explain the lack of rising temperatures anyway they can.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Hivemind says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:39 pm

>>

>> One day the warmists will work out that their theory is completely wrong.
Possibly after the next glacial period starts. Nah, they'll just blame carbon
dioxide, that incredibly magical molecule.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * richard vernney says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 1:59 am

>>

>> **That is the wonder of CO2 and its _basic physics._**  
>  Before one can properly understand science, it is necessary to get the
basics right, and it is vital to properly understand the basic physics of the
CO2 molecule and what this can do in the real world. Let me briefly detail:  
>  The basic physics of CO2 is that at times, increasing levels of CO2 cause
the atmosphere to warm, but not the oceans. But other times, the basic physics
of increasing levels of CO2 is that it does not cause the atmosphere to warm,
but instead energy completely (or very substantially) by passes the atmosphere
all together, and instead it causes the oceans to warm  
>  Another of the basic physics of CO2 is that at times, increasing levels of
CO2 will not cause the atmosphere to warm nor the top of the oceans, but
instead energy will completely by pass both of these and will instead cause
the mid to deep ocean to warm.  
>  Yet a further example of the basic physics of the CO2 molecule is that at
times (say between 1940 to mid 1975) rising levels of CO2 neither cause the
atmosphere nor the oceans to warm, but instead impacts upon climate scientists
brains causing them to adjust data so as to get rid of the 1940s blip (as
documented in the Climategate emails).  
>  **The basic physics of the CO2 molecule is truly one of the 7 wonders of
the modern world.**

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Samuel C Cogar says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:28 am

>>

>> There is a nasty ole Anthropogenic Global Warming secret about CO2 that the
proponents of CAGW are not telling you. Surprise, surprise, there are actually
two (2) different types of CO2.  
>  There is both a naturally occurring CO2 molecule and a hybrid CO2 molecule
that has a different physical property. The new hybrid CO2 molecule contains
an H-pyron which permits one to distinguish it from the naturally occurring
CO2 molecules.  
>  The H-pyron or Human-pyron is only attached to and/or can only be detected
in CO2 molecules that have been created as a result of human activity. Said
H-pyron has a Specific Heat Capacity of one (1) GWC or 1 Global Warming
Calorie that is equal to 69 x 10 -37th kJ/kg K or something close to that or
maybe farther away.  
>  Thus, said H-pyron is very important to all Climate Scientists that are
proponents of CO2 causing Anthropogenic Global Warming (CAGW) because it
provides them a quasi-scientific “fact” that serves two (2) important
functions: 1) it permits said climate scientists to calculate an estimated
percentage of atmospheric CO2 that is “human caused” ……. and 2) it permits
said climate scientists to calculate their desired “degree increase” in
Average Global Temperatures that are directly attributed to human activity.  
>  As an added note, oftentimes one may hear said climate scientists refer to
those two (2) types of CO2 as “urban CO2” and ”rural CO2” because they can’t
deny “it is always hotter in the city”.  
>  And there you have it folks, the rest of the story, their secret scientific
tool has been revealed to you.  
>  Yours truly, Eritas Fubar

>>  
>>                 >>                           * John Harmsworth says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:47 pm

>>

>> Don't forget, at times it causes warming that is unmeasurable in any
medium- yet still dangerous!

>>  
>>                 >>                       11. Ricdre says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:20 pm

>>

>> When I got to "Using two computer models that simulate the ocean" I
realized that it's models all the way down and there was no need to read any
further.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * jeanparisot says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 4:48 am

>>

>> Exactly, if it doesn't say "Using two computer models that simulate the
ocean, we optimized our experimental design for our data collection/sensor
build …" then I stop reading.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * ATheoK says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:08 pm

>>

>> Aye!  
>  Then the researchers finish with:

>>

>>> "“Most of the excess heat from climate change will go into the ocean
eventually, we think,” Romanou said. “Most of the excess chemical pollutants
and greenhouse gases will be buried in the ocean. But the truth is that the
ocean recirculates that extra load and, at some point, will release some of it
back to the atmosphere, where it will keep raising temperatures, even if
future carbon dioxide emissions were to be much lower than they are now.”  
>  This eventual release of buried gases and heat from the oceans is sometimes
called the “warming in the pipeline” or “warming commitment” that people will
eventually have to contend with, Romanou said."

>>

>> Quite an assumption there. Without proof.  
>  Then there is the impending disaster money quote, "warming commitment",
that people will eventually have to contend with".  
>  When is that?  
>  2,000 years?  
>  3,000 years?  
>  Never?  
>  Ocean depths hold incredible volumes of very cold water. At the current
ocean heating rate of, 0.017°C per decade for a very small amount of ocean.
The true answer is never.

>>  
>>                 >>                       12. Kip Hansen says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:24 pm

>>

>> The quantitative finding on CO2 absorption by the oceans is likely to be
erroneous -- as they are not accounting for the **biological processes** that
remove CO2 from both the air and the water. CFCs may be a good proxy for
ocean/atmosphere mixing, but not for CO2 accounting.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * AndyG55 says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:58 pm

>>

>> Someone doesn't know their diffusion theory very well do they.  
>  CO2 will only be taken up by the oceans if the partial pressure of CO2 are
towards that happening  
>  Oceans hold 98% of the world's CO2, and Henry's law etc control the
interchange  
>  CFC's on the other hand are probably not at high relative concentrations in
the ocean relative to the atmosphere.  
>  So the whole premise of the study is based on NONSENSE. !!!  
>  CFC's are NOT a good marker for CO2 !

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Smart Rock says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 9:45 pm

>>

>> Not sure that Henry's law applies strictly to CO2. It would apply to CFCs,
which are just gases that dissolve in water according to temperature and
partition with the atmosphere. But CO2 doesn't just dissolve, it reacts with
water, so that most of the CO2 in sea water is in the form of bicarbonate
and/or carbonate ions. And this of course makes it available to carbonate-
shelled organisms that are busy living, dying and sinking to the bottom, i.e.
sequestering the demon gas.  
>  So don't expect it to come bubbling back in the near future.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:33 am

>>

>> Smart Rock,  
>  "But CO2 doesn’t just dissolve, it reacts with water, so that most of the
CO2 in sea water is in the form of bicarbonate and/or carbonate ions."  
>  Exactly correct, and the formation of those ions moves seawater towards the
acidic end of the scale.  
>  I don't think we should, based on what we recall of eighth grade chemistry,
jump to the conclusion NASA planetary scientists don't understand science.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:20 am

>>

>> AndyG55,  
>  You need to make a distinction between the ocean surface and the deep
ocean. Only the ocean surface has a direct contact with the atmosphere over a
large area. The surface contains ~1000 GtC inorganic carbon mainly as
bicarbonates, comparable to the ~800 GtC in the atmosphere.  
>  Henry's law is only for the gaseous form of CO2 in seawater, which is only
1% of all inorganic carbon in seawater, thus a doubling of CO2 in the
atmosphere in first instance only increases total carbon in the surface with
1%. Thanks to its buffer working, the other carbon species also increase, so
that the total increase is about 10% of the change in the atmosphere.  
>  The main oceanic CO2 sink is where the cold ocean waters sink in the deep:
the pCO2 difference there is maximal with a difference of 400 μatm (atm) and
250 μatm (ocean surface). Ocean chemistry and buffer capacity don't play any
role once in the deep oceans, thus the sinking waters still are largely
undersaturated for CO2. Temperature at the surface reduces the pCO2 difference
between atmosphere and surface (+16 μatm/K) somewhat, but that is only a small
percentage of the uptake speed. The same, but reverse at the upwelling sites.  
>  Thus CFC's are not good tracers for the CO2 uptake in the ocean surface,
but are good tracers for following the fate of human CO2 in the deep oceans
(as good as the 14C from the atomic bomb tests is).

>>  
>>                 >>                       13. Walter Sobchak says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:28 pm

>>

>> "Using two computer models that simulate the ocean, NASA and MIT scientists
found that gases are more easily absorbed over time than heat energy."  
>  When I got to this sentence. I stopped. What follows is mathematical
onanism not science. Science would be measuring the the amounts of heat and
gas the oceans absorb. But that would be expensive, time consuming tedious,
sweaty, and dirty. It would take years. Why not pad your resume with a garbage
paper based on fun with numbers.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 1:16 am

>>

>> "“Using two computer models that simulate the ocean, NASA and MIT
scientists found that gases are more easily absorbed over time than heat
energy.”  
>  When I got to this sentence. I stopped. What follows is mathematical
onanism not science."  
>  It doesn't pay to underestimate the power of modern computer modelling. The
models would have all relevant physical chemistry parameters built into them -
think of them as calculators rather than models - that's how they are
employed. It is standard practice in many fields of science to use these
'simulation calculators' on super computers to investigate complex situations
that can be tackled no other way.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * richard vernney says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:17 am

>>

>>> It doesn’t pay to underestimate the power of modern computer modelling.

>>

>> I guess that explains why there are more than 90 climate models, all
disagreeing with each other and not one of them agreeing with reality.  
>  http://thefederalist.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Climate-Model-
Comparison-1024×921.png  
>  **If your assertion was correct, there would be but one climate model for
each of the three CO2 scenarios (ie., BAU, reducing CO2 emissions, no further
CO2 emissions). What we know as fact is that your assertion is very far wide
of the mark.**

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Hans-Georg says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:58 am

>>

>> This is already true, but the chemical and physical mechanisms of the
climate system are only partially (in the direction of catastrophic heating),
while some existing thermostats of the system are missing in the models.
However, I trust the models already, the discrepancy described in the work
between the absorption of heat (why is this word in English always described
only with heat, between cold and heat there are many intermediate stages, I
praise nevertheless the German language) and of gases in a "quieter" ocean.
This is work, which can also be simulated in the laboratory.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Thomas Homer says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 5:53 am

>>

>> Jack Davis: "The models would have all relevant physical chemistry
parameters built into them "  
>  Then please plug in the actual parameter values of the Mars' atmosphere
and, show that the model correctly models the Mars' atmosphere. And then as a
follow up, please explain which parameter over-rides the CO2 Greenhouse
Property since CO2 traps no heat on Mars.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Walter Sobchak says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:37 am

>>

>> I have some mortgage bonds that you would like to buy -- cheap. They were
created with mathematical models have all relevant economic parameters built
into them. – think of them as calculators rather than models – that’s how they
are employed. It is standard practice in many fields of science to use these
‘simulation calculators’ on super computers to investigate complex situations
that can be tackled no other way.  
>  A fool and his money …

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Walter Sobchak says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:58 am

>>

>> Jack: Not even in theory. Here are your assignments:  
>  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Butterfly_effect  
>  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nonlinear_system  
>  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Navier%E2%80%93Stokes_equations  
>  Climate Models for the Layman By Judith Curry, GWPF, 2017
http://www.thegwpf.org/content/uploads/2017/02/Curry-2017.pdf  
>  Believing in Six Impossible Things Before Breakfast, and Climate Models  
>

>>  
>>                 >>                           * I Came I Saw I Left says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 7:26 am

>>

>> "The models would have all relevant physical chemistry parameters built
into them – think of them as calculators rather than models – that’s how they
are employed. "  
>  You've just verified Stephen Skinner's comment above  
>  “Today’s scientists have substituted mathematics for experiments, and they
wander off through equation after equation, and eventually build a structure
which has no relation to reality”. - Nikola Tesla

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Walter Sobchak says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 7:04 am

>>

>> Add this to your assignment list:  
>  "This is How Climate Works – Part 2" Guest essay by Mike Jonas posted on
January 29, 2017  
>  https://wattsupwiththat.com/2017/01/29/this-is-how-climate-works-part-2/  
>  "All output from all climate computer models – as currently structured – is
a work of fiction."  
>  "As the IPCC itself said (AR4 WG1): 'we should recognise that we are
dealing with a coupled nonlinear chaotic system, and therefore that the long-
term prediction of future climate states is not possible.'"

>>  
>>                 >>                       14. Berniea says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:47 pm

>>

>> CO2 in the ocean does not behave like an inert tracer gas. It is reactive
and it is converted to carbonates by organisms which die and sink to the
bottom never to be seen again.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * AndyG55 says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:59 pm

>>

>> Yep, that too. 🙂

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Hivemind says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:43 pm

>>

>> Except as limestone millions of years later.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Fraizer says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 7:02 am

>>

>> Exactly. What is the solubility of an acid gas in an infinitely buffered
alkaline solution?

>>  
>>                 >>                       15. Walter Sobchak says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 7:54 pm

>>

>> Let me begin by saying that I am neither a physicist nor a mathematician.
But, I don't think I am an idiot either.  
>  When looking at the Earth and its atmosphere, I notice that:  
>  1. 70% of the earth is covered by water,  
>  2. the atmosphere is mostly transparent,  
>  3. most of the sunlight, which is the source of the energy that powers the
climate, falls on the oceans, which are dark, and must therefore absorb most
of that energy.  
>  4. that the mass of oceans is more than 200x the mass of the atmosphere,
and the specific heat of water is 4.2x that of air.  
>  Doesn't all of this mean that we should begin our study of the climate with
the oceans. Are they not the dog?, and, is not the atmosphere the tail?
(actually few, if any, dogs have a tail that is one thousandth of their body).

>>  
>>                 >>                         * AndyG55 says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:01 pm

>>

>> "and, is not the atmosphere the tail? "  
>  More like a flea on the tale of the dog. 😉

>>  
>>                 >>                           * jaakkokateenkorva says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:18 am

>>

>> And anthropogenic emissions might be one hair on the flea.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Bob Weber says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:18 pm

>>

>> The idiots are on the side that thinks 0.04% of the air can warm undersea
to any depth.  
>  So sad that NASA & MIT can't figure out that **the sun deposits all the
heat that enters the ocean** , nor that it takes time for that heat to
resurface, and that all the heat they think the air is losing to the ocean is
going to space.  
>  https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2013/10/ocean-penetration-by-
solar-spectrum1.png

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Bob Weber says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:21 pm

>>

>> …except for seamount activity…

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Patrick MJD says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:27 pm

>>

>> "Bob Weber July 13, 2017 at 8:18 pm  
>  The idiots are on the side that thinks 0.04% of the air can warm undersea
to any depth."  
>  It's worse than that. The claim is only human emissions of CO2 are driving
climate change, so that's about 4% of that 0.04%. 9.99999999999999999/10th's
of SFA.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:41 pm

>>

>> Exactly Bob.  
>  I never even got to this in my comment on their factual errors.  
>  They state several times that water which descends as part of the
thermohaline circulation can reappear at the surface in a few years.  
>  Once that water gets cold and dense, and then sinks, it encounters water
which is very cold. It does not soon appear again at the surface.  
>  It is instead gone, most likely on an 800 or so year sojourn to the deep
ocean.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Jack Davis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 1:36 am

>>

>> "Doesn’t all of this mean that we should begin our study of the climate
with the oceans. Are they not the dog?, and, is not the atmosphere the tail?"  
>  Yes, I guess it's because we inhabit the 'tail' that we are more conscious
of changes there. Perhaps if Earth's sentient/industrial species were the
dolphins they would have noticed the problem earlier - though they might have
had difficulty getting the coal fired power stations running in the first
place!  
>  The 'tail' atmosphere is what drives the greenhouse effect though - without
it, the energy absorbed during the day by all that ocean (and land) would be
sent off planet in the night.  
>  You've actually come to an understanding that is in complete agreement with
the accepted science.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * jaakkokateenkorva says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:22 am

>>

>> In my opinion the front end of the dog is better in many ways Jack, but you
choose of course.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Ben Wouters says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 4:16 am

>>

>> Jack Davis July 14, 2017 at 1:36 am  
>  With your greenhouse effect warming the deep oceans, why are the same deep
oceans on an 85 million year cooling track, losing ~18K over that time.  
>  When do you expect the oceans will be back at the temperature they were
around 85 million years ago?

>>

>>
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/store/10.1029/2011JC007255/asset/supinfo/jgrc12191-sup-0010-fs09.pdf?v=1&s=79e93e124ca1fd8a33753fc667ff17deaa20b3e6  
>  from this study  
>  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2011JC007255/abstract

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Walter Sobchak says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:47 pm

>>

>> "The ‘tail’ atmosphere is what drives the greenhouse effect though –
without it, the energy absorbed during the day by all that ocean (and land)
would be sent off planet in the night."  
>  Wrong again. Water holds 4.2 times as much heat as air. It loses heat far
more slowly than air. Water temperature varys far less over the diurnal cycle
than air temperatures.

>>  
>>                 >>                       16. Kaiser Derden says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:01 pm

>>

>> the impact of their warming on the climate has been dramatically
reduced.???? their warming IS part of the Climate … circular logic …

>>  
>>                 >>                       17. Tom in Florida says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:12 pm

>>

>> Sorry if I sound a bit confused but why then do the oceans cool down when
the seasons change from summer to winter? Where does all that accumulated heat
go?

>>  
>>                 >>                       18. Jim says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:15 pm

>>

>> Computers have become marvels at animated simulations. Whether or not they
represent reality is another thing. Sadly the scientist behind the work
strongly believe so and with the support of the media, forgone conclusions are
promoted as the final word.

>>  
>>                 >>                       19. Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:25 pm

>>

>> When someone demonstrates basic ignorance of the subject material, why
would you believe anything they have to say about some crystal ball gazing
guesswork regarding the future evolution thereof?  
>  And when assumptions are made at the outset of any study that are
questionable at best, of what value is the work done? If these underlying
assumptions are wrong, then everyone's time has been wasted.  
>  "The red line on the map shows the Gulf Stream current, the surface portion
of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation"  
>  The map shows a red arc originating in the Atlantic ocean, and approaching
Florida from the East, turning north up the East coast of the US, and then
swinging northeastward.  
>  But that is not the path taken by the Gulf Stream!  
>  The Gulf Stream originates in…wait for it…the Gulf! The Gulf of Mexico to
be specific. It then passes through the straits of Florida between Cuba and
the Florida Keys, turns northward and runs very close to the East coast of
Florida until gradually moving offshore starting at around Palm Beach.  
>  The red arc is about 50% comprised of an area called the Antilles Current.  
>  Basic factual error of a glaring nature.  
>  "In the Atlantic Ocean, the Gulf Stream is part of what’s called the
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, a conveyor belt of ocean water
that carries warm water from Florida to Greenland where it cools and sinks to
1000 meters (about 3281 feet) or more before traveling back down the coast to
the tropics."  
>  Calling this a conveyor belt is ridiculous and unsupportable.  
>  The implication is, that it is only the water sinking in the North Atlantic
that draws the Gulf Stream northward out of the tropics.  
>  This is mostly false.  
>  The Gulf stream is largely wind driven.  
>  And it is also driven by the currents which converge into the Gulf of
Mexico…the North Equatorial Current, and an incredibly long fetch of water
from near Cape Horn which is comprised of, in turn, the Benguela Current, The
Guinea Current, the South Equatorial Current, and the Caribbean current.  
>  All of that water has to go somewhere!

>>

>>
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/67/Ocean_currents_1943_(borderless)3.png  
>  It may be that water becoming dense and sinking in the north Atlantic is
where some of the water of the western limb of the North Atlantic gyre winds
up, but I think it is far from proven to be the case that world wide oceans
currents will grind to a halt if less water sinks near Greenland!  
>  It is not like it has nowhere else to go, and the winds are still pushing
water, in any case.  
>  Several assumptions on very weak evidence, and that flat out ignore huge
inputs.  
>  And then there is this:  
>  "Adding heat to the ocean, in contrast, slows down the overturning
circulation because ocean currents depend on temperature gradients – moving
from warmer locations to cooler locations – that weaken under global warming
as cooler waters heat up"  
>  Now, just on the basics, this is plainly illogical. If ocean currents
depend on temperature gradients (they seem to have forgotten that wind is a
thing, but letting that go for now), and the globe and hence the oceans are
warming, this would equate to an increase in the energy of the system. So
there is that.  
>  And the tropics are still hot, all year around. And the polar regions are
still very cold, especially in Winter season. And what is the difference in
temperature between these regions? Is there any indication of warming oceans
to an extent that approaches magnitude of the difference in the temperature of
the ocean between the tropical and the polar regions? Are they talking about
the missing heat which is hiding in the deep ocean again?  
>  The inanity is breathtaking.  
>  Large groups of supposedly educated people just making stuff up, and then
play pretending it is real and that they are scientists saving the world.  
>  They do not even seem to have much idea of what they are talking about,
regarding the basics of the subject matter of ocean currents.  
>  Ocean currents depend on temperature gradients?  
>  Did they really do an entire study of ocean currents and never once mention
a thing called wind?  
>  Of course, if they have there way, we may just suck a large amount of the
wind energy in the atmosphere into the electric grid, and this really might
slow down the currents.  
>  Here are maps of worldwide ocean currents and generalized atmospheric
circulation patterns…wind.  
>  Notice any similarities?  
>  https://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/~dib2/GE1001/July.jpeg  
>  http://www.seos-project.eu/modules/oceancurrents/images/global_currents.png

>>  
>>                 >>                         * goldminor says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 7:22 am

>>

>> Now that is a great map of the oceans, thanks for posting.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Bill Illis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 9:18 am

>>

>> Yes, that is one really great Ocean model when they have the AMOC
completely wrong.  
>  This is what happens when climate scientists move into other areas. They
take their pre-conceived notions with them and end up with the completely
wrong analysis.  
>  I made a series of comments on this thread which people should find
interesting.  
>  https://wattsupwiththat.com/2016/01/22/yet-another-prediction-of-doom-over-
greenland-ice-melt-and-the-amoc-that-we-can-ignore/#comment-2127010

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Bill Illis says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 9:22 am

>>

>> Archived version that preserves some of the important charts.

>>

>>
https://web.archive.org/web/20160124095602/http://wattsupwiththat.com/2016/01/22/yet-
another-prediction-of-doom-over-greenland-ice-melt-and-the-amoc-that-we-can-
ignore/#comment-2127146

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 8:24 pm

>>

>> That was a great comment thread Bill.  
>  There was another one a while before this one where a bunch of people
really drilled down into the physics of water density and salinity, and just
where the deep cold water really does originate.  
>  Let me look for it.  
>  It was around when I first started commenting here.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Bill Yarber says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 9:30 am

>>

>> Nicely done, excellent post. Other basic science they conveniently ignore!  
>  We know:  
>  1) All Greenland and Vostock ice core analysis show that Earth's
temperature changes ALWAYS leads CO2 concentration changes by ~400 years on
way up and ~800 years on the way down.  
>  2) Cold water is denser and sinks, warm water is less dense and rises (as
does air).  
>  3) Cold water can retain more dissolved CO2 and outgasses excess CO2 as it
warms.  
>  4) Land surfaces warm faster than the oceans.  
>  5) Plant life flourishes in warmer climates with adequate moisture,
absorbing more CO2 due to photosynthesis.  
>  Conclusion: As the Earth warms, it takes more time to warm the oceans than
the land which is primary cause of the time lag in CO2 concentration! The time
lag is lengthened as vegetation covers more and more of the land surface and
absorbs more CO2 outgassed by the oceans.  
>  CO2 is a LAGGING parameter. Lagging parameters are never drivers, they are
RESULTANTS! CO2 is NOT the control knob for Earth's climate! CO2
concentrations below 180ppm result in the cessation of plant respiration and
plant life dies, humanity will soon follow! Now that's a catastrophe to worry
about.

>>  
>>                 >>                       20. willhaas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:45 pm

>>

>> This is great information regarding the simulated ocean but what about the
real ocean. The greenhouse gas, CO2, is trivial when considering the real
ocean. The real ocean is made up of more than 98% of the liquified form of
another socalled greenhouse gas, H2O. which should be much more of a concern
than CO2.

>>  
>>                 >>                       21. JohninRedding says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 8:57 pm

>>

>> The environment is so large and dynamic that there is always a balancing
act going on. Other than an all out nuclear war, I don't mankind's activities
have the ability to majorly impact the environment worldwide. Local areas,
yes. But worldwide is another matter.

>>  
>>                 >>                       22. Andrewpattullo says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 9:06 pm

>>

>> They "discovered" features of ocean behaviour in their models the same way
I "discover" carrot cake in a pan after leaving batter in the oven.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 9:09 pm

>>

>> These are the same people who, upon discovering ice cubes melting on the
kitchen floor, conclude that this is proof that the house warming rapidly and
must therefore be about to burn down.

>>  
>>                 >>                       23. Dr. S. Jeevananda Reddy says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 9:29 pm

>>

>> --- “Most of the excess heat from climate change will go into the ocean
eventually, we think,” Romanou said. “Most of the excess chemical pollutants
and greenhouse gases will be buried in the ocean. But the truth is that the
ocean recirculates that extra load and, at some point, will release some of it
back to the atmosphere, where it will keep raising temperatures, even if
future carbon dioxide emissions were to be much lower than they are now.”  
>  This eventual release of buried gases and heat from the oceans is sometimes
called the “warming in the pipeline” or “warming commitment” that people will
eventually have to contend with, Romanou said. ---  
>  All this is hypothetical. It is far from the reality. It is not science.  
>  So far nobody has presented what is the global warming component of global
average temperature anomaly. Without this understanding, making statements
like those referred above has no meaning in terms of Science.  
>  With reference to chemical pollutants and greenhouse gases -- There is no
quantitative data to show this. Also, how will they be carried in to oceans?
Hypothetical argument.  
>  All this highlights the hypocrisy in peer reviewing in important journals.  
>  Dr. S. Jeevananda Reddy

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Peter Evans says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:39 am

>>

>> You want the truth about that big iceberg cracking off?  
>  There has been constant man made haarp interference right alng that crack.  
>  Dont believe me?  
>  Do a search on utubes "earthquake caused larsen shelf iceberg" and you will
see a record of 10k deep earthquakes that were later deleted from earthquake
history.  
>  I have full records that show the listings that were deleted.  
>  Cracked off by man 100%

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Dr. S. Jeevananda Reddy
says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 8:15 pm

>>

>> Peter Evans -- It is true.  
>  I in fact presented in my books on Natural disasters, man made disasters
[physical impact], etc on their role on climate chand and thus the impact on
nature.  
>  Dr. S. Jeevananda Reddy

>>  
>>                 >>                       24. doriangrey1 says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 9:45 pm

>>

>> Yea, stupid NASA-MIT. What is driving the Ocean currents? Not the
atmosphere, to even suggest that indicates a serious failure to grasp basic
physics. Try "Gravity" your physic professor might not flunk you. Without
earths moon oceanic currently would be determined almost exclusively by
Newtons Second Law; conservation of angular momentum.  
>  The water would accumulate most at the equator, where density, temperature
and salinity would dictate the velocity of currents flowing pole-ward. As
water evaporates from the surface, salinity increases. The higher saline
content water sinks. As it sinks, it gets colder, causing it to sink faster.  
>  Earth, however does have a moon, and said moon has a gravitational field
that interacts with earths oceans in dynamic manner. That gravitational field
does not pass exclusively over the exact same geographic position every single
orbit. It literally wobbles. As that gravitational field is passing over over
the earth it literally is dragging the earths oceans with it. Hello, high
tides, low tides anyone?  
>  The moons gravity is dragging the oceans, but it is not dragging it
perfectly or consistently around the equator. The atmosphere may affect the
oceans surface, but only to a depth of a few dozen meters. Beyond that ocean
currents are a combination of gravity and conservation of angular momentum as
effected by water density, salinity and temperature.  
>  Somebody at NASA-MIT should be unemployed for ever agreeing to spend one
penny on this farce of a research project.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Thomas Homer says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:02 am

>>

>> Indeed, and the Moon also creates 'tides' in the Earth's atmosphere. We're
told more atmosphere 'traps' more heat. Has NASA - MIT - Columbia University
shown how high tide at noon 'traps' more heat than low tide at noon in the
same location?

>>  
>>                 >>                       25. SAMURAI says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:06 pm

>>

>> I almost (but not quite) feel sorry for Leftist wackos that still blindly
believe in this CAGW sc@m…  
>  Facts and physics thwart all of CAGW's main premises, especially: Henry's
Gas Law (98% of CO2 end up beneficially in the oceans), 4 laws of
Thermodynamics (especially entropy and heat transfers from warmer to cooler
objects), the Coriolis Effect (earth's rotation drives ocean currents, not
CO2), the heat capacity of the oceans is 1,000 TIMES more than the atmosphere,
etc…  
>  The top 1,000 meters of oceans have only risen about 0.09C since 1950… Oh,
the humanity…  
>  Because .09C of ocean warming over the last 70 years (Levitus et al 2012)
isn't scary enough, CAGW advocates use giga joules and Hiroshima-bomb
equivalents to scare the mindless masses over ocean "catastrophic" waaaaarming
--lions and tigers and bears, oh, my…  
>  CAGW advocates realize the CAGW sc@m already exceeds the parameters
necessary for official disconfirmation (CAGW projections already exceeded
reality by over 2 standard deviations for 21 years, and the disparity
continues to rapid expand), so they're relegated to: ranking warm years,
manipulating raw global temp data, lying (i.e. "97% of all scientists believe
in the CAGW hypothesis", "severe weather is getting worse and worse", etc),
and name calling…  
>  This silly new paper is just cover for when global temps start falling in
about 5 years from collapsing solar cycles and PDO/AMO 30-year cool cycles.  
>  CAGW advocates will claim, "See! CO2 induced Global Warming causes global
cooling from decreased ocean currents…"- just watch them make this claim..

>>  
>>                 >>                         * jaakkokateenkorva says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:30 am

>>

>> +10

>>  
>>                 >>                         * M Seward says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:39 am

>>

>> Banzai!! Banzai!! Banzai!!

>>  
>>                 >>                           * SAMURAI says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:40 am

>>

>> Thanks, Seward-san!  
>  Here is the cool looking kanji for banzai: 万歳, which means "10,000 years".  
>  Let's hope this CAGW sc@m doesn't last that long..

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 8:21 am

>>

>> I would just like to point out that the Coriolis is not an actual Force.
It's more like a phantom..  
>  When air moves across the surface of the Earth or water moves across the
ocean it is deflected by the fact that the Earth is a sphere and is spinning.
The spinning of the Earth by itself doesn't cause the oceans to move. Any more
than it causes air to move.  
>  Because the water in the air are moving right along with the Earth. But if
air or water near the equator let's say for instance begins to move poleward,
wines of being deflected because the angular momentum it has at the equator
causes it to move in a different direction once it's not at the equator
anymore.  
>  Another way to look at it is that at the Equator the Earth is spinning at a
thousand miles an hour but every place else it's spinning slower than that. So
a air or water that moves poleward from the equator, find itself moving faster
than the earth that's underneath it.  
>  Coriolis causes winds to deflect into gyres, and wind causes ocean currents
which are then deflected by the Coriolis Force.  
>  The primary circulation of the earth is the Hadley cells. Air flowing
around the Hadley cells is deflected by coriolis Force. This is what leads to
the huge gyres of air and water.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:25 pm

>>

>> Hiroshima bomb equivalents…when you hear that unit of thermal energy being
bandied about, you know that the people speaking are the straight-talking and
unbiased sort.

>>  
>>                 >>                       26. M Seward says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:17 pm

>>

>> "New NASA research is one of the first studies to estimate how much and how
quickly the ocean absorbs atmospheric gases.."  
>  you mean based on actual data recorded from the oceans etc…?  
>  Umm no, ….  
>  "Using two computer models that simulate the ocean, NASA and MIT scientists
found that gases are more easily absorbed over time than heat energy."  
>  and then the doozy  
>  "These results from the computer models of the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation are one of the many moving parts that come together in
global climate models. By refining scientists’ understanding of how
efficiently gases and heat are taken up, the finding will improve global
climate model projections for future climate scenarios, .." aparently says
some turkey.

>>  
>>                 >>                       27. Roger says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 10:21 pm

>>

>> "Two computer models were used …….". I do no believe a word of it. I have
developed and used computer models. They can be instructive, but not
determinative. That is, provided no garbage has been entered.

>>  
>>                 >>                       28. Mr Julian Forbes-Laird says:

>>  
>>

>> July 13, 2017 at 11:18 pm

>>

>> Heat transfer from the air to the oceans requires violation of the second
law of thermodynamics. Garbage. There's also the small problems arising from
the 4:1 water:air specific heat capacity ratio and the water to air mass
difference…

>>  
>>                 >>                       29. SAMURAI says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:03 am

>>

>> Female CAGW advocate to her significant other:  
>  "Honey, does my stupid make my butt look bigger?"

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:21 pm

>>

>> "No honey, your incredible stupidity and your giant butt are completely
unrelated".

>>  
>>                 >>                       30. Stephen Richards says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 1:04 am

>>

>> As the ocean slows down, it will keep uptaking gases like carbon dioxide
more efficiently,  
>  So, gas absorption by water, is a function of it's speed of movement?
Really? Temperature we know about but speed. Now I always thought that
turbulence aided absorption but turbulence isn't flow.

>>  
>>                 >>                       31. richard verney says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:19 am

>>

>> Moderators  
>  I have posted a couple of comments but these have gone into moderation
because I have mispelt my own name (vernney instead of verney). Please look
out for them and post them with the correct spelling of my name. Thanks.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Okay then. Will Do. Mod

>>  
>>                 >>                       32. poitsplace says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:28 am

>>

>> It will take 500 years to raise the average ocean temperature by 1C and the
water is absorbing CO2 so fast that it clearly has not reached saturation even
for current CO2 levels. So as far as anthropogenic global warming is
concerned, it won't be returning "heat in the pipe" or degassing for a VERY
long time. It is effectively a bottomless pit since we will likely have
stopped burning coal long before any of the water comes back up and CO2 will
have returned to close to normal levels, along with whatever temperature
impacts are felt.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:37 pm

>>

>> You call the preindustrial levels of CO2, which were among the lowest in
the history of the Earth, normal?  
>  Taking everything that we know regarding Earth history, levels of CO2 in
the air through geologic time, the relationship between CO2 and the entire
food chain of the terrestrial and oceanic biosphere, and the levels of CO2
which create optimum growth conditions in plants…I think it is fair to
conclude that for life in general, CO2 levels of somewhere between 3 to 5
times present levels, or about 1200 to 2000 PPM of atmospheric CO2…would be
normal, best, and most productive and thus healthiest for life on Earth…humans
included.  
>  Right now the biosphere is the functional equivalent of a person with
severe kwashiorkor malnutrition who has had a few bites to eat and will not
die today.  
>  Lets make sure the biosphere has plenty to eat tomorrow and for all of the
tomorrows.

>>  
>>                 >>                       33. Magoo says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:35 am

>>

>> By what mechanism is heat transferred to the ocean from the atmosphere?  
>  The heat in the atmosphere can act as insulation to slow heat loss from the
ocean, but by what means does atmospheric heat that only penetrates a
millimeter or so into the surface of a turbulent, rough ocean surface warm the
ocean?  
>  This is the mechanism that is never explained by anyone (including the
iPCC), yet we are expected to accept it without a method of how it's supposed
to happen. It sounds like an unsubstantiated, desperate attempt at fobbing off
a lack of atmospheric warming for the past 2 decades more than anything else.

>>  
>>                 >>                       34. jaakkokateenkorva says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:37 am

>>

>> NASA is extending itself beyond parody, but this may still work  
>

>>  
>>                 >>                       35. FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 2:57 am

>>

>> In itself it is no problem to use models to simulate changes which are
difficult to know from reality, as long as the underlying physics are based on
real life data. Unlike climate models, ocean data are relatively known, based
on (currently) over three million ocean surface and less abundant deep ocean
data, here for the CO2 uptake/release:  
>  https://www.pmel.noaa.gov/pubs/outstand/feel2331/exchange.shtml  
>  The same ocean survey data include temperature, pH, DIC (total inorganic
carbon), total alkalinity, sea salt content,…  
>  See e.g. the longer series at Bermuda:  
>  http://www.biogeosciences.net/9/2509/2012/bg-9-2509-2012.pdf  
>  Thus I suppose that these two models are not so far off from reality as
most climate models are. The latter have far more problems like clouds which
are far below their resolution range…  
>  Despite that, I have two main objections:  
>  - The MOC/THC is not only dependent of temperature differences, it is also
largely dependent of winds: at the pulling side: off-land winds in the East
Pacific which pulls deep ocean waters up, to the joy of the fishermen of the
Peruvian and Chilean coasts. El Niño is the main game breaker there. At the
pushing side: the SW-NE winds which pushes the warm Gulf Stream along the
North America coast to NE Europe. Thanks to the Himalaya plateau that pushes
the normal West-East circulation northwards.  
>  Thus even with less temperature differences, a large part of the MOC/THC
would survive.  
>  - Even if the average ocean temperature increases, the main temperature
difference remains about the same: Tropical waters show their main variations
during ENSO events, but the average tropical temperatures show the lowest
change over history, as the top temperature is topped due to evaporation and
hurricanes. The same for the sink side: mostly at the edge of the sea-ice,
where temperatures are always near freezing and salinity is highest.

>>  
>>                 >>                       36. jaakkokateenkorva says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:01 am

>>

>>> Acting like a massive sponge, the oceans pull from the atmosphere heat,
carbon dioxide and other gases, such as chlorofluorocarbons, oxygen and
nitrogen and store them in their depths for decades to centuries and
millennia.

>>

>> Is this a prelude to man-made ocean change? Over millennia?

>>

>>
https://68.media.tumblr.com/61cf4654713bad34e4ba17bed85d0f80/tumblr_nnhn0eDEL21tkb2p0o1_500.gif

>>  
>>                 >>                       37. Matt S says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:17 am

>>

>> This is such patent bullshit: "Acting like a massive sponge, the oceans
pull from the atmosphere heat"  
>  The oceans are warmer than the lower troposphere on average and the energy
emitted by CO2 as a GH gas can not penetrate water, and cant therefore cause
warming.

>>  
>>                 >>                       38. David Middleton says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:26 am

>>

>> Many of the comments here clearly demonstrate the damage that climate
models have done to scientific credibility.  
>  Most scientific endeavors rely to some extent on models, particularly the
the areas of Earth and Atmospheric sciences. Hypotheses are essentially
models.  
>  The utter and abject failure of climate models to demonstrate predictive
skill has led many people to simply stop reading after the phrase "computer
models."

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:35 am

>>

>> David you are correct. As soon as I read Mears uses climate models to make
empirical adjustments to RSS, or the other recent study attempting to
reconcile mode v analysis, adjusted model data and claimed bingo.  
>  This is not only Climate science.  
>  A NASA team sent quartz gyroscopes to space, and the experiment failed
totally due to unforeseen influences on the ultra sensitive gyroscopes (that
this was not foreseen was tragic science by the NASA team). After the actual
experiment failed utterly, NASA team adjusted and changed the obs data for 5
years and then claimed success.

>>  
>>                 >>                       39. Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:32 am

>>

>> ugh UGH an elaborate Heidi Cullen "my dog ate global warming" nonsense.  
>  Do these clowns even understand the way in which a heat sink works, the
analogy is incorrect.  
>  There are no heat sinks in the natural world.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:37 am

>>

>> unless anyone can tell me what nature does to deal with unwanted heat that
is? 😀 There is no such thing as "unwanted heat" in the natural world

>>  
>>                 >>                       40. Robertvd says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:32 am

>>

>> http://jonova.s3.amazonaws.com/graphs/lappi/65_Myr_Climate_Change_Rev.jpg  
>  I think most people do not understand that we are living IN an Ice Age.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:38 am

>>

>> and the common lie in response is the "rate of change". << that is how Bill
Nye among many other alarmists\propagandists resolves his own cognitive
dissonance.  
>  Climate Central Heidi Cullen are still trying to blame Larsen C on AGW 😀

>>  
>>                 >>                       41. mairon62 says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:39 am

>>

>> Oceans are a "sink"? They're the primary source of greenhouse gasses.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:41 am

>>

>> The oceans are not a heatsink. It's more nonsense language from people at
NASA.  
>  Idiots DO work for that agency, regurgitated edu is not intelligence. Sadly
many think it is

>>  
>>                 >>                         * FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 4:14 am

>>

>> mairon62,  
>  The oceans are more CO2 sink than source in the past near 60 years of
measurements:  
>  https://www.pmel.noaa.gov/pubs/outstand/feel2331/maps.shtml

>>  
>>                 >>                       42. Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:40 am

>>

>> David, maybe you can put a number, rough number on how much money NASA have
blown in 50 years. I bet it would make one's eyes pop from the sockets.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * David Middleton says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:26 am

>>

>>> Federal funding for climate change research, technology, international
assistance, and adaptation has increased from $2.4 billion in 1993 to $11.6
billion in 2014, with an additional $26.1 billion for climate change programs
and activities provided by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act in 2009.
As shown in figure 1, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has reported
federal climate change funding in three main categories since 1993:

>>

>> Eyeballing it, I'd say a little over $120 billion since 1993…  
>  http://www.gao.gov/assets/680/670757.jpg

>>

>>> As illustrated in figure 2, many federal entities manage programs and
activities related to climate change. Each of these federal departments and
agencies is operating under its own set of authorities and responsibilities
and addresses climate change in ways relevant to its mission. In the context
of providing climate-related information, the National Research Council
observed that no single government agency or centralized unit could perform
all the required functions, and that coordination of agency roles and regional
activities is a necessity.

>>

>> And it appears that almost every bureau, agency and administration of the
alphabet soup have been involved…  
>  http://www.gao.gov/assets/680/671057.jpg

>>

>>
http://www.gao.gov/key_issues/climate_change_funding_management/issue_summary

>>  
>>                 >>                           * jaakkokateenkorva says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:48 am

>>

>> Drain the swamp!

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:00 pm

>>

>> JFC!!  
>  Thanks for getting that info David, I had no clue wjere to start

>>  
>>                 >>                       43. Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:43 am

>>

>> Going by "heatsink" logic, the atmosphere would be the heatsink in a
relationship between the ocean and air.  
>  The oceans get almost all of their heat from the sun, but shhh

>>  
>>                 >>                       44. Robertvd says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:50 am

>>

>> Back Radiation can't heat the ocean.  
>  https://i1.wp.com/www.john-daly.com/sverdrup.gif

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Dr Deanster says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:29 am

>>

>> Robert ….. this is my thought as well. I have always read that the transfer
of heat is almost always from the ocean to the atmosphere, not the reverse.
Energy input into the ocean is in the visible and below range where it is
transformed into heat and radiated back to the atmosphere as IR. As such, I
don't see how they can say that the ocean is much of a heat absorber from the
atmosphere at all. Further, wave action would tend to decrease penetration at
the surface of short wave, thus calmer water would increase the overall
absorption of energy into the ocean, though it sounds plausible that waves
would increase the uptake of what minimal LW is striking the surface. But that
amount is so small, it's not worth mentioning.  
>  This article is a bunch of propaganda that serves the agenda, and ignores
all else.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:59 am

>>

>> Spot on, but we already know AGW warming the oceans to boiling was nothing
but James Hansen science fiction.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Toneb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 1:04 pm

>>

>> https://moyhu.blogspot.co.uk/2010/10/can-downwelling-infrared-warm-
ocean.html  
>  Or, if you prefer …..  
>  http://www.drroyspencer.com/2014/04/can-infrared-radiation-warm-a-water-
body/

>>  
>>                 >>                       45. Geoff Sherrington says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:54 am

>>

>> Problems?  
>  How far back in time are CFCs measured/found in sea water? Only after man
started making them?  
>  There are 2 broad ways to look at gas dissolution/exsolution with water.
One is the lab model, where small containers are used and the experiment
continues until the liquid is fully mixed. Henry's Law is derived this way.  
>  The other way has a large container that is not even constrained at the
sides and bottom. The ocean. Currents can bring new water to the test region,
whose response is affected by continuous renewal with liquid whose composition
reflects its generally unknown past. Henry'law is not immediately useful,
except maybe to set some boundaries.  
>  Climate work is dogged with a continuing impediment. A hard scientist would
say of a study like this "We cannot report these results yet because we cannot
correct for the many other variables, including unknown unknowns." The Climate
world approach more often is " There are likely to be other unknowns but we
will forget about them for the purpose of this investigation. Off to print
now."  
>  Geoff

>>  
>>                 >>                       46. pochas94 says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:56 am

>>

>> These people can't seem to get it into their heads that nobody believes
their COx/Greenhouse Gas modelistic schtick anymore.

>>  
>>                 >>                       47. hunter says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 4:19 am

>>

>> Wow….basic physics as old as the universe are presented Disney style as
valiant fighters being crippled by wicked humans. Humans so wicked, these
cynical climate extremists claim, that we are going to ruin the ocean's very
current and circulation system.  
>  What utterly corrupt nonsense the climate hypesters expect the rest of us
to believe.

>>  
>>                 >>                       48. jaakkokateenkorva says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 4:26 am

>>

>> After decade-long alarmist prognostications big oil has never paid a dime
back, but let's see if Macron's million euro check from the local taxpayers is
in la poste already:  
>  Sun cannot possibly have anything to do with the ocean temperature. It must
be man-made hot gases forcing their way down from the troposphere sinking all
the way to Mariana trench. And back up via volcanic eruptions revenging
reproductive and other decadence of our ancestors over millennia.

>>  
>>                 >>                       49. Glenn says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 5:29 am

>>

>> No mechanism for thermalised energy in the air to penetrate into the ocean
and heat the ocean. And why would they need one? Their 'discoveries' via
'observation' are in the model world that do not have to obey the laws of
thermodynamics and the actual geophysic structure of the ocean Atmosphere
interface.  
>  Does the model show how thermalised energy first doesn't rise from its
point of thermalisation in the air, second is able to move downwards and
navigate through the ocean's Knudsen layer - that consumes thermalised energy
immediately above the ocean to find vaporisation of water molecules -, thirdly
how any remaining thermalised energy after navigating the Knudsen layer can
penetrate into and through the ocean surface tension skin when the molecules
at the very top of the skin in contact with Earth's sea level atmospheric
pressure are in a constant higher kinetic energy state than any thermalised
energy in the air above the ocean - or anywhere in the atmosphere for that
matter.  
>  Of course the models do not recognise these basic first order principles,
otherwise they can't make the unphyduxal claims that they have here - that
thermalised energy in the atmosphere can and does penetrate into the ocean
from above the ocean. Can't happen in the real world which is why these
Pythagorean's live in model world superimposed on the real physical world.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Bob Shapiro says:

>>  
>>

>> July 19, 2017 at 9:01 pm

>>

>> All these unvalidated models!! Somebody should say, "When a scientist
creates a 'study' using unvalidated models, he crosses over into being an
advocate. While every American has the right to advocate whatever they want,
then they can't try to pass themselves off as scientists - and they can't work
for GISS or any other (supposedly) scientific agency of the government."

>>  
>>                 >>                       50. beng135 says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:12 am

>>

>>> When it sinks near Greenland, those dissolved gases and heat energy are
effectively buried in the ocean for years to decades and longer. Removed from
the atmosphere by the ocean, the impact of their warming on the climate has
been dramatically reduced.

>>

>> More fake science (I love throwing the liberal's new catch words back at
them). First, I don't give a hoot about dissolved gases and their "impact".
Second, water has to be COLD (near freezing) to sink. Heat isn't being
"buried", COLD is!

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Dr Deanster says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:36 am

>>

>> I think where they go wrong, is they seem to think that CO2 hangs on to
that heat as it dissolves in the ocean, thus taking its heat with it as it
magically defies physics and sinks. The truth is more likely that CO2 looses
its additional energy immediately upon absorption, taking on the heat
environment of the water, with the excess energy being used up in the process
of evaporation.  
>  To listen to these guys, every molecule of CO2 is a little floating nuclear
power plant spewing heat out wherever it goes.

>>  
>>                 >>                       51. nickreality65 says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:36 am

>>

>> Is space cold or hot? There are no molecules in space so our common
definitions of hot/cold/heat/energy don’t apply.  
>  The temperatures of objects in space, e.g. the earth, moon, space station,
mars, venus, etc. are determined by the radiation flowing past them. In the
case of the earth, the solar irradiance of 1,368 W/m^2 has a Stefan Boltzmann
black body equivalent temperature of 394 K. That’s hot. Sort of.  
>  But an object’s albedo reflects away that heat and reduces that
temperature.  
>  The earth’s albedo reflects away 30% of the sun’s 1,368 W/m^2 energy
leaving 70% or 958 W/m^2 to “warm” the earth and at a S-B BB equivalent
temperature of 361 K, 33 C colder than the earth with no atmosphere or albedo.  
>  The earth’s albedo/atmosphere doesn’t keep the earth warm, it keeps the
earth cool.  
>  Over 3,000!! (up 1,200 since 6/9) views on my WriterBeat papers which were
also sent to the ME departments of several prestigious universities (As a BSME
& PE felt some affinity.) and a long list of pro/con CAGW personalities and
organizations.  
>  NOBODY has responded explaining why my methods, calculations and
conclusions in these papers are incorrect. BTW that is called SCIENCE!!  
>  SOMEBODY needs to step up and ‘splain my errors ‘cause if I’m correct
(Q=UAdT runs the atmospheric heat engine) – that’s a BIGLY problem for RGHE.  
>  Step right up! Bring science.  
>  http://writerbeat.com/articles/14306-Greenhouse--We-don-t-need-no-stinkin-
greenhouse-Warning-science-ahead-  
>  http://writerbeat.com/articles/15582-To-be-33C-or-not-to-be-33C  
>  http://writerbeat.com/articles/16255-Atmospheric-Layers-and-Thermodynamic-
Ping-Pong

>>  
>>                 >>                         * FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:10 am

>>

>> Nick,  
>  As the earth is a sphere, didn't you forget to take into account that you
need to reduce the flat earth surface radiation of 1,368 W/m^2 with a factor
4?

>>  
>>                 >>                       52. Kim says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:43 am

>>

>> Solar IR is changed to heat by the ground. The ground is short term
storage. the ground heats up the oceans. The oceans are long term storage and
are conveyors.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Menicholas says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 8:04 am

>>

>> I am not sure how you are supposing that heat is transferred from ground
surfaces into the ocean water?  
>  And I do not think conveyors is a very good word to use for ocean currents.
The conveyor belt is a continuous loop in which one part is connected to all
the other parts and pulling on one part or pushing on one part will move all
the other parts by necessity.  
>  The oceans are not like conveyor belts, they're huge pools of water that
are very deep, and have complex shapes, multiple layers with various degrees
of mixing between the layers, and have currents in them, and that are
constantly changing.

>>  
>>                 >>                       53. MarkW says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 6:54 am

>>

>> Are they implying that NASA has found the hidden heat?

>>  
>>                 >>                       54. LT says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 7:11 am

>>

>> If they put more emphasis on solar variations adding heat to the oceans
they might actually find out the truth, instead of chasing this flawed CO2
hypothesis. I wish NASA would abandon climate research and focus on what we
(The Taxpayers) pay them to do.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * I Came I Saw I Left says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 8:25 am

>>

>> Indeed. NASA doing climate science is like climate scientists probing
Uranus. However much the latter may want to do that it's really not their
business to be going where no man has gone before. NASA should stick to space
and aeronautics and let climate scientists play with their virtual reality
video games.

>>  
>>                 >>                       55. tadchem says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 8:29 am

>>

>> Somebody ought to teach these people some physical chemistry, Absorption of
gases, heat, etc. by water occurs at the gas/water interface - something
called the 'surface', which is far more efficient when the surface-to-volume
ratio is high, as on a raindrop. The rain falling on the oceans in the tropics
and temperate zones is saturated (or nearly so) with atmospheric gases - some
of which (CO2, NOx) are more soluble in water than others (N2, O2, ozone).
Raindrops are also in thermal equilibrium with the air, so they transport
atmospheric heat into the ocean. The rain 'scrubs' the air. The main driver of
ocean currents is gravity - specifically the tidal forces of the sun and moon
acting on the earth and the oceans - which is why the main circulation is
always eastward on that part of the circuit nearest the equator.  
>  Any model of chemical and thermal transport in the oceans that does not
include the influence of rainfall and tides is hopelessly oversimplified.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Robert Kernodle says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:09 am

>>

>> Gravity !  
>  Who knew ?

>>  
>>                 >>                         * FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:25 am

>>

>> tadchem,  
>  Solubility of CO2 in fresh water is very low, as there is no buffer
capacity in fresh water. Even without extra pollution from SO2 and NOx, the pH
would drop to around 4.  
>  Most CO2 is released from warm equatorial waters, together with water
vapor. When that condenses to rain, it needs several hundred m3 air to form 1
l of rain, what it absorbs from the CO2 at that height is negligible. If that
rains out, falls on the ground and evaporates, that gives 1 ppmv CO2 extra in
the first m3 of the atmosphere…  
>  Only if you take into account the massive quantities of water transported
via the atmosphere, there may be an appreciable amount of CO2 circulating with
it, but mostly between the oceans and the oceans, thus a null operation… What
falls on land still needs millions of years to form the beautiful caves we see
everywhere in carbonate rocks and the returning waters are in many cases
buffered with (bi)carbonates…

>>  
>>                 >>                       56. AJ_74 says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:00 am

>>

>> I'm hardly a scientist, and please feel free to educate me if my ignorance
is unbearable, but…  
>  Doesn't what they're proposing run counter to CAWG dogma? The dogma says,
"If left unchecked, DOOM". Wouldn't the world's oceans in this scenario be the
ultimate 'check' on CAGW? Am I still supposed to believe that the human race
will be extinct by 2100 if we don't eliminate all fossil fuel consumption by
2030?  
>  I'm so confused.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Robert Kernodle says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:11 am

>>

>> Ignorance is far more bearable than stupid. I speak from the former
perspective.

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Robert Kernodle says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 10:14 am

>>

>> If I were speaking from the latter perspective, then I wouldn't even know
it.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * FerdiEgb says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 11:43 am

>>

>> AJ_74,  
>  According to the Bern model, used in near all climate model's calculations
for the IPCC, the deep oceans get saturated when they have absorbed about 10%
of all our CO2 emissions. Thus according to them a lot of CO2 remains in the
atmosphere for very long periods…  
>  The problem is that this only may be true when you burn all know reserves
of gas and oil and a lot of available coal, but by far not for smaller total
emissions.  
>  The original calculations were made for the above scenario when 3000 GtC
CO2 was released and worse for 5000 GtC CO2, thus including enormous amounts
of coal.  
>  Currently we have burned fossil fuels in the past 165 years, emitting some
total 370 GtC CO2 in the atmosphere. If we should cease all emissions, that
will ultimately end mostly in the deep oceans, where already some 37,000 GtC
in different forms is present. Thus all our emissions together will increase
the deep oceans with less than 1% (minus what is buried permanently in
vegetation). In equilibrium with the atmosphere, that also will end 1% higher,
thus 293 ppmv CO2 instead of 290 ppmv for the current ocean surface
temperature…  
>  There is until now not the slightest sign of saturation of the deep oceans,
thus wait and see what the future brings…

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:34 pm

>>

>> Given the ratio of Co2 in the deep oceans compared to emissions of humans,
there will not be a signal by the time oil runs out, dear lord!

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 12:34 pm

>>

>> and truth be told we know nothing about the deep oceans, relatively
speaking, we are 5th graders on that topic

>>  
>>                 >>                           * Patrick MJD says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 1:46 am

>>

>> "Mark - Helsinki July 14, 2017 at 12:34 pm"  
>  We know more about the moon than we do deep ocean.

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Patrick MJD says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 1:48 am

>>

>> "AJ_74 July 14, 2017 at 10:00 am  
>  I’m hardly a scientist, and please feel free to educate me if my ignorance
is unbearable, but…  
>  The dogma says, “If left unchecked, DOOM”."  
>  Let me correct you there;  
>  The dogma says, “If left UNTAXED, DOOM”.

>>  
>>                 >>                       57. S. Malone says:

>>  
>>

>> July 14, 2017 at 3:35 pm

>>

>> Do these authors even consider the amount of CO2 the oceans are capable of
absorbing on a semi-permanent to permanent basis? Good grief, there are entire
mountain ranges build of marine limestone in the Western U.S. Do the authors
give any thought to the capacity of marine organisms to steal CO2 and turn it
into rock?

>>  
>>                 >>                       58. Sandy In Limousin says:

>>  
>>

>> July 15, 2017 at 12:28 am

>>

>> Isn't the largest long term Carbon sink CaCO3? As seen in limestone and
chalk (The White Cliffs of Dover for instance) CaCO3 created naturally for
shells of marine organisms, snails, and eggs, corals and many other sources.

>>  
>>                 >>                       59. Mark - Helsinki says:

>>  
>>

>> July 16, 2017 at 11:00 am

>>

>> Heat sink analogy is a bogus concept and with concepts reality leaves the
room.  
>  I suspect night time and clouds on the night side of the planet have a
large influence on the energy budget.  
>  I think this is the route for radiation to head out into space, and is
regulated by clouds.

>>  
>>                 >>                       60. davidbennettlaing says:

>>  
>>

>> July 17, 2017 at 1:09 pm

>>

>> What if CFCs aren't just a passive tracer?  
>  Does anyone remember that from the '60s through the '90s we gaily sprayed
and leaked chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) into the atmosphere? And that Mario
Molina told us that this was a no-no because in so doing we were destroying
our all-important ozone shield? That allowed solar ultraviolet radiation
(UV-B) to stream through the thinned ozone layer (remember the ozone hole?)
and cause all sorts of horrible things like bad sunburn and genetic damage.
UV-B is HOT!  
>  So, we very sensibly shut down CFC production with the Montreal Protocol.
No one thought, however, that this ultra-hot ultraviolet radiation could also
cause global warming. No, because "obviously" the cause of global warming was
rising carbon dioxide! Funnily enough, shortly after the Montreal Protocol,
global warming went into "hiatus" mode, but carbon dioxide just kept on
rising. The climate scientists were baffled. What happened? They tried to
pretend that the so-called "hiatus" didn't really exist, and they even
performed various data manipulations to make it go away.  
>  But it didn't. It's a reality. And guess what: almost all the chlorine from
all the CFCs we put into the atmosphere is still up there, destroying ozone
catalytically, and chlorine has a very long residence time in the atmosphere.  
>  So, you see, the inconvenient "hiatus"and its elevated temperatures will be
with us for quite some time to come, but eventually, the chlorine will
precipitate out and global cooling will begin, while carbon dioxide continues
on its merry way upward, doing nothing at all to the climate.  
>  So,it seems that all the climate scientists are, like Don Quijote, tilting
at the wrong windmill. "It's chlorine, stupid, not carbon dioxide."

>>  
>>                 >>                       61. Lisa says:

>>  
>>

>> July 18, 2017 at 3:06 pm

>>

>> Extended periods of darkness has more to do with lack of ozone at the
poles. Sunlight is necessary for ozone production. 🌞

>>

>> Comments are closed.

>>

>> # Search WUWT:

>>

>> Search

>>

>> # Donate to support WUWT

>>

>> Support our work: HERE ![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-

ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/donate-

now.png)![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/06/donate-now.png)

>>

>> # The Maxim of our resolve

>>

>> “ _Walk toward the fire. Don’t worry about what they call you._ " - Andrew
Breitbart | read more

>>

>> # Blog Stats

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 389,602,110 hits

>>  
>>

>> ![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/ICCC13-175-225.png)

>>

>> # Top Posts & Pages

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Glacier National Park Quietly
Removes Its 'Gone by 2020' Signs

>>  
>>                       * 2019 Atlantic hurricane forecast

>>  
>>                       * The moral case for honest and competent climate
science

>>  
>>                       * 'A Yahoo From Yahoo News': Trump's EPA Chief Fires
Back At

>>  
>>

>> Reporter Who Misquoted Him

>>  
>>                 >>                       * New Policy Brief Shows No
Evidence of Accelerated Sea-Level Rise

>>  
>>                       * Researchers retract a paper because it turns out
not to be about

>>  
>>

>> bulls&$#

>>  
>>                 >>                       * On the Flat Earth Rants of Joe
Postma

>>  
>>                       * The Holocene Sea Level Highstand

>>  
>>                       * El Niño and [its] contribution to 21st Century
Warming -

>>  
>>

>> interview with Dr. Roy Spencer.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Anti-Trump AG Sued For Using
Bloomberg-Funded Attorneys To

>>  
>>

>> Promote A Climate Crusade

>>

>> # Weather Picture of the Day

>>

>> ![](https://cache1.intelliweather.net/wpotd/todayx240.jpg)

>>

>> Advertisements

>>

>> **" …the world's most viewed climate website"**  
>  - Fred Pearce _The Climate Files:  
>  The Battle for the Truth about Global Warming_

>>

>> **" …invaluable"** - Steven F. Hayward, _The Weekly Standard_

>>

>> **" …changed the world and is one of the most influential resources on
global warming.** - Jonathon Moseley, _American Thinker_

>>

>> **" …flashy (apparently widely distributed)"** - Michael E. Mann

>>

>> # Follow me on Twitter

>>

>> My Tweets

>>

>> # Follow WUWT via Email

>>

>> You are following WUWT via email

>>

>> Join 41,530 other subscribers

>>

>> Email Address

>>

>> Follow

>>

>> Advertisements

>>

>> # ENSO METER

>>

>> ![](http://4castwidgets.intelliweather.net/enso/wuwt/elninometer-

current.gif)

>>

>> # Recent Posts

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Demystifying feedback.

>>  
>>                       * EIA data shows wind & solar met 3% of U.S. energy
after $50

>>  
>>

>> billion in subsidizes

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Glacier National Park Quietly
Removes Its 'Gone by 2020' Signs

>>  
>>                       * El Niño and [its] contribution to 21st Century
Warming -

>>  
>>

>> interview with Dr. Roy Spencer.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The Holocene Sea Level Highstand

>>  
>>                       * Anti-Trump AG Sued For Using Bloomberg-Funded
Attorneys To

>>  
>>

>> Promote A Climate Crusade

>>  
>>                 >>                       * How deep-ocean vents fuel
massive phytoplankton blooms

>>  
>>                       * 2019 Atlantic hurricane forecast

>>  
>>                       * Former communications director, and spokesperson
for Al Gore,

>>  
>>

>> Named Chief of Content, Communications, and Public Affairs for National
Geographic Society.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 'A Yahoo From Yahoo News':
Trump's EPA Chief Fires Back At

>>  
>>

>> Reporter Who Misquoted Him

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The moral case for honest and
competent climate science

>>  
>>                       * New Policy Brief Shows No Evidence of Accelerated
Sea-Level Rise

>>  
>>                       * The epic search for oldest ice in Antarctica is
starting

>>  
>>                       * Researchers retract a paper because it turns out
not to be about

>>  
>>

>> bulls&$#

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Early lives of Alaska sockeye
salmon accelerating with climate

>>  
>>

>> change

>>

>> July 2017 M | T | W | T | F | S | S  
>  ---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
>  « Jun | | Aug »  
>  | 1| 2  
>  3| 4| 5| 6| 7| 8| 9  
>  10| 11| 12| 13| 14| 15| 16  
>  17| 18| 19| 20| 21| 22| 23  
>  24| 25| 26| 27| 28| 29| 30  
>  31 |

>>

>> # Archives

>>

>> Archives Select Month June 2019 (36) May 2019 (201) April 2019 (201) March
2019 (227) February 2019 (197) January 2019 (222) December 2018 (232) November
2018 (214) October 2018 (192) September 2018 (180) August 2018 (181) July 2018
(178) June 2018 (194) May 2018 (191) April 2018 (164) March 2018 (185)
February 2018 (170) January 2018 (178) December 2017 (153) November 2017 (176)
October 2017 (173) September 2017 (188) August 2017 (218) July 2017 (185) June
2017 (121) May 2017 (131) April 2017 (131) March 2017 (147) February 2017
(125) January 2017 (149) December 2016 (139) November 2016 (138) October 2016
(171) September 2016 (133) August 2016 (142) July 2016 (138) June 2016 (156)
May 2016 (160) April 2016 (163) March 2016 (172) February 2016 (137) January
2016 (133) December 2015 (158) November 2015 (136) October 2015 (123)
September 2015 (129) August 2015 (130) July 2015 (146) June 2015 (144) May
2015 (157) April 2015 (125) March 2015 (126) February 2015 (115) January 2015
(106) December 2014 (130) November 2014 (136) October 2014 (163) September
2014 (185) August 2014 (190) July 2014 (173) June 2014 (195) May 2014 (216)
April 2014 (182) March 2014 (185) February 2014 (164) January 2014 (202)
December 2013 (144) November 2013 (146) October 2013 (147) September 2013
(148) August 2013 (165) July 2013 (174) June 2013 (164) May 2013 (193) April
2013 (171) March 2013 (164) February 2013 (165) January 2013 (172) December
2012 (126) November 2012 (139) October 2012 (176) September 2012 (151) August
2012 (144) July 2012 (175) June 2012 (179) May 2012 (177) April 2012 (178)
March 2012 (190) February 2012 (161) January 2012 (142) December 2011 (161)
November 2011 (168) October 2011 (180) September 2011 (189) August 2011 (190)
July 2011 (170) June 2011 (187) May 2011 (177) April 2011 (177) March 2011
(172) February 2011 (183) January 2011 (193) December 2010 (183) November 2010
(168) October 2010 (191) September 2010 (179) August 2010 (200) July 2010
(188) June 2010 (140) May 2010 (124) April 2010 (122) March 2010 (136)
February 2010 (142) January 2010 (157) December 2009 (168) November 2009 (163)
October 2009 (132) September 2009 (106) August 2009 (92) July 2009 (96) June
2009 (94) May 2009 (89) April 2009 (99) March 2009 (99) February 2009 (60)
January 2009 (60) December 2008 (58) November 2008 (45) October 2008 (63)
September 2008 (75) August 2008 (77) July 2008 (68) June 2008 (72) May 2008
(54) April 2008 (54) March 2008 (39) February 2008 (40) January 2008 (31)
December 2007 (27) November 2007 (37) October 2007 (29) September 2007 (17)
August 2007 (31) July 2007 (20) June 2007 (25) May 2007 (31) April 2007 (31)
March 2007 (27) February 2007 (24) January 2007 (25) December 2006 (22)
November 2006 (11)

>>

>> # Categories

>>

>> Categories Select Category 2017 Solar Eclipse 350.org connect the dots 97%
consensus 99% certainty Adjustments/Corrections Aerosols Agriculture AGU AGU
2013 AGU 2014 AGU 2015 AGU16 Air pollution Al Gore Alarmism Albedo AMO
Announcements Antarctic Anthropocene Anthropogenic Ocean Warming Arctic ARGO
data Astronomy Atmospheric physics Attribution Bad science Bad science
journalism Bengtsson Climate McCarthyism scandal Berkeley Earth Surface
Temperature Biodiversity biofuels Biomass Book Review Cancun Climate
Conference Cap-and-trade Carbon credits Carbon dioxide Carbon footprint Carbon
sequestration Carbon soot carbon tax Celebrities on AGW censorship CFC's Chaos
and Climate Citizen science Climate Attribution Climate cash Climate Change
Debate Climate Communications Climate Craziness of the Week Climate data
Climate Economics Climate FAIL Climate Hypocrisy Climate Lawsuits Climate
Models Climate Myths Climate News Climate News Roundup Climate Politics
Climate reconciliation Climate Reference Network climate refugees Climate
Science Climate sensitivity Climate ugliness Climate_change Climategate
Climategate 3.0 Clouds Coal Cold wave Common sense Consensus COP conferences
Copenhagen Climate Conference Copygate coral reefs Cosmic rays Cowtan & Way
Curious things Current News Desertification Disaster disinvitation Drought
Durban Climate Conference dust storms Earth Earthquakes Economy-health
Education Educational opportunity El Nino Basics Emergence Emergent Climate
Phenomena Emissions Endangered Species Energy ENSO Environment EPA erosion
Experiments Extinction extreme weather Fake News Fakegate feedbacks flooding
fog FOI Forecasting Forests Fracking Freeman Dyson FUG Fun_stuff Fusion power
Gavin Schmidt Geoengineering geothermal energy Gergis et al GHCN GISS Glaciers
Global cooling Global Greening Global Temperature Update Global warming Global
Warming in Perspective Global Warming Optimism GLOC Gore-a-thon 2011 Gore-a-
thon 2012 Gorefest11 Government funding of science Government idiocy Graph of
the Week Gravity Green Blob Green Mafia Green New Deal Green tech Greenland
ice sheet HADCRUT4 hail Hausfather et al 2017 heat wave Hiatus in Global
Warming History Hits and Misses How Climate Works Humor humour hurricanes
hydroclimatology Hydropower Ice Ages IPCC IPCC AR5 leak IPCC AR5 Report Ira
It's Worse Than We Thought! James Hansen John Cook junk science Karl et al.
2015 Katowice Conference Land Surface Air Temperature Data Land use land cover
change Landslides Letters To The Editor Lewgate Lewis and Crok lightning
Little Ice Age Local_issues Lower Troposphere Temperature Lukewarmerism
Marcott et al proxy paper Mass Extinctions measurement media
MedievalWarmPeriod Methane MetOffice Michael E. Mann MJO Modeling modification
monsoons More On Series NASA NASA GISS National Climate Assessment Report
Natural CO2 sources natural gas Natural Warming NCADAC NCDC NCEI News
Newsbytes NGOs NOAA NOAA 2 year FOIA documents NOAA ERSST.v4 Pauses Buster
Noble Cause Corruption nuclear power Obama Climate Plan Obamas War on Energy
Obvious science Ocean acidification Ocean Heat Content Ocean Temperatures
Oceans Oil and Gas Open Thread Opinion Optical phenonmena Ozone
Paleoclimatology Papal Climate Encyclical Paris Climate Accord PDO Peer review
PEOPLE WILL DIE! Personal note petroleum Plankton and other critters Podcasts
Polar Amplification Polar Bears Polar Vortex Polarbeargate Politics Positive
effects of CO2 Post-normal science Presentations Proxies Puzzling things Quote
of The Month Quote of the Week Radiation Radiative Imbalance Rainfall RCP 8.5
Science Fiction records Reference Pages Renewable energy reproducibility
RICO20 Ridiculae Rio+20 Russia Salinity Satire Science Sea Sea ice Sea Ice
News Sea level Sea Surface Temperature Snow snowfall social cost of carbon
Solar solar flare solar power Southern Annular Mode Space Spaceweather
Specific Humidity Spencer-Braswell and Dessler statistics Stephan Lewandowsky
Stern Review Stratospheric water vapor Surfacestations paper Surveys
Sustainability Tabloid Climatology TAO/TRITON Buoys Technology Temperature The
"Clitanic" aka Spirit of Mawson The Rat-hole problem The Skeptic's Case The
Weather Channel The WUWT Hot Sheet The Yamal Deception thorium power Throwback
Thursday Predictions thunderstorms tornadoes Transportation Trenberth's
missing heats Tropical Hot spot Tropics Tsunami UHI UKMO HADCRUT4
Uncategorized Uncertainty United Nations USCRN USGS Volcanoes Vortex Vulcanism
Waste heat Watts et al 2012 Weather Weather_stations Wiki Wars Wildfires
Willis Autobiography wind power WUWT-TV

>>

>> # Bookmarks

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 1000+ skeptical papers

>>  
>>                       * A Walk On The Natural Side - Jim Steele

>>  
>>                       * AccuWeather GW Blog

>>  
>>                       * American Elephants

>>  
>>                       * Andrew Bolt

>>  
>>                       * Appinsys

>>  
>>                       * Australian Climate Madness

>>  
>>                       * Autonomous Mind

>>  
>>                       * Bishop Hill

>>  
>>                       * Bob Carter

>>  
>>                       * C3 Headlines

>>  
>>                       * Carlin Economics

>>  
>>                       * Cartoons By Josh

>>  
>>                       * Christopher Booker

>>  
>>                       * Climate Abyss - John Nielsen-Gammon

>>  
>>                       * Climate Audit

>>  
>>                       * Climate Change 101

>>  
>>                       * Climate Change Dispatch

>>  
>>                       * Climate Conversation - NZ

>>  
>>                       * Climate Debate Daily

>>  
>>                       * Climate Depot

>>  
>>                       * Climate Progress

>>  
>>                       * Climate Realists

>>  
>>                       * Climate Realists of Norway

>>  
>>                       * Climate Resistance

>>  
>>                       * Climate Sanity

>>  
>>                       * Climate Science - Pielke Sr.

>>  
>>                       * Climate Skeptic

>>  
>>                       * Climate Views

>>  
>>                       * CO2 Science

>>  
>>                       * Collide-a-scape - Keith Kloor

>>  
>>                       * Die Kalte Sonne

>>  
>>                       * Digging in the Clay

>>  
>>                       * Dr. Norman Page

>>  
>>                       * Dr. Roger Pielke Jr.

>>  
>>                       * Dr. Roy Spencer

>>  
>>                       * Dr. Tim Ball

>>  
>>                       * Ecotretas

>>  
>>                       * EU Referendum - Richard North

>>  
>>                       * Friends of Science

>>  
>>                       * Green Hell Blog

>>  
>>                       * Haunting the library

>>  
>>                       * ICECAP

>>  
>>                       * International Climate Science Coalition

>>  
>>                       * James Delingpole @ Breitbart

>>  
>>                       * Jennifer Marohasy

>>  
>>                       * Jo Nova

>>  
>>                       * Judith Curry

>>  
>>                       * Lucia's The Blackboard

>>  
>>                       * Marcel Crok – De staat van het klimaat

>>  
>>                       * Master Resource

>>  
>>                       * Moshtemp - Steve Mosher

>>  
>>                       * NCDC Hi/Lo Records lookup

>>  
>>                       * Niche Modeling - David Stockwell

>>  
>>                       * No Frakking Consensus

>>  
>>                       * No Tricks Zone

>>  
>>                       * NYT Dot Earth - Revkin

>>  
>>                       * Our World in Data

>>  
>>                       * Planet Gore

>>  
>>                       * Real Climate

>>  
>>                       * scienceofdoom

>>  
>>                       * Skeptical Science – John Cook

>>  
>>                       * Small Dead Animals

>>  
>>                       * SOHO solar images

>>  
>>                       * Solar Cycle 24 Board

>>  
>>                       * Stoat - Connolley

>>  
>>                       * Surfacestations Gallery

>>  
>>                       * Surfacestations Main

>>  
>>                       * Susan Crockford - polarbearscience

>>  
>>                       * Tallbloke’s Talkshop

>>  
>>                       * Tamino's Open Mind

>>  
>>                       * The Air Vent

>>  
>>                       * The Chiefio - E.M. Smith

>>  
>>                       * The Cosmic Tusk

>>  
>>                       * The Daily Bayonet

>>  
>>                       * The GWPF

>>  
>>                       * The Hockey Schtick

>>  
>>                       * The Lukewarmer's Way - Tom Fuller

>>  
>>                       * The Next Grand Minimum

>>  
>>                       * The Reference Frame

>>  
>>                       * Thomas Fuller – 3000quads

>>  
>>                       * Tom Nelson

>>  
>>                       * Trust Yet Verify

>>  
>>                       * UAH AMSU Daily Temps

>>  
>>                       * Warren Meyer

>>  
>>                       * Warwick Hughes

>>  
>>                       * Weather Picture of the Day

>>  
>>                       * WFT - Interactive Climate Graph Engine

>>  
>>                       * William Briggs

>>  
>>                       * World Climate Report

>>  
>>

>> ![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2010/10/hsi_montford.jpg)![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-

ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/spencer_tggwb.jpg)

>>

>> # Click for the:

>>

>> ![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2012/08/watts_et_al_2012_button.png)

>>

>> # Sea Ice Page

>>

>> ![](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/uploads/2009/09/jaxa_amsre_thumbnail.png)

>>

>> # Solar Images & Data Page

>>

>> ![](https://sdo.gsfc.nasa.gov/assets/img/latest/latest_256_HMIIC.jpg)

>>

>> # ENSO/SST Page

>>

>> ![](https://www.ospo.noaa.gov/data/sst/anomaly/anomnight.current.small.gif)

>>

>> # WUWT Tag Cloud

>>

>> Al Gore antarctica Arctic Australia Bill McKibben california climate
climate change Climate model Climatic Research Unit email controversy Current
sea level rise Earth El Niño-Southern Oscillation Energy environment Global
warming Goddard Institute for Space Studies greenhouse gas greenland Heartland
Institute Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC James Hansen Judith
Curry La Nina Little Ice Age Met Office Michael Mann NASA National Climatic
Data Center National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Weather
Service NOAA Pacific Ocean Peter Gleick Polar ice packs Science &
Environmental Policy Project Sea ice Steve McIntyre sun temperature
Temperature record United States United States Environmental Protection Agency
Watts Up With That?

>>

>> # Feed Me

>>

>> ![RSS Feed](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/images/rss/green-small.png) RSS - Posts

>>

>> ![RSS Feed](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/images/rss/green-small.png) RSS - Comments

>>

>> ![USB Temperature Datalogger - small, compact, inexpensive, easy to use.

Many models

available.](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2009/06/usb_datalogger_160ad.jpg)![USB

Temperature Datalogger - small, compact, inexpensive, easy to use. Many models

available.](https://wattsupwiththat.files.wordpress.com/2009/06/usb_datalogger_160ad.jpg)

>>

>> # Meta

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Log in

>>  
>>                       * Entries RSS

>>  
>>                       * Comments RSS

>>  
>>                       * WordPress.org

>>  
>>

>> # Copyright Notice

>>

>> Material on this website is copyright © 2006-2019, by Anthony Watts, and
may not be stored or archived separately, rebroadcast, or republished without
written permission. (Miriam O'Brien aka slandering "Sou" from Hotwhopper, that
means you.)

>>

>> For permission, contact us. See the About>Contact menu under the header.

>>

>> All rights reserved worldwide.

>>

>> Some material from contributors may contain additional copyrights of their
respective company or organization.

>>

>> We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on WUWT. If
you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it. This
notice is required by recently enacted EU GDPR rules, and since WUWT is a
globally read website, we need to keep the bureaucrats off our case! Cookie
Policy

>>

>> Proudly powered by WordPress | Theme: Expound by Konstantin Kovshenin

>>

>> Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address
![loading](https://4k4oijnpiu3l4c3h-zippykid.netdna-ssl.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif) Cancel

>>

>> Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

>>

>> Email check failed, please try again

>>

>> Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

>>

>> %d bloggers like this:

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

