
>

> __
![](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%200%200'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![](https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/themes/c2es/resources/img/c2es.png)

>

>> >>                       * Policy Hub

>>  
>>                       * Climate Solutions

>>  
>>                       * Climate Basics

>>  
>>                       * Our Work

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                       * Library

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Events

>>  
>>                       * Blog

>>  
>>                       * Newsroom

>>  
>>                       * Business Leadership

>>  
>>                       * Contact

>>  
>>                       * Donate

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * __Follow

>>  
>>                         * Facebook

>>  
>>                         * LinkedIn

>>  
>>                         * Twitter

>>  
>>                         * YouTube

>>  
>>                       * __Share

>>  
>>                       * __Search

>>  
>>

>> __Home

>>

>> __

>>

>> #### Policy Hub

>>  
>>                 >>                       * International

>>  
>>                       * US Federal

>>  
>>                       * State

>>  
>>                       * City/Local

>>  
>>                       * Carbon Pricing

>>  
>>

>> #### Climate Solutions

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Business Leadership

>>  
>>                       * Technology Solutions

>>  
>>                       * Resilience Solutions

>>  
>>                       * Solutions Stories

>>  
>>                       * Reducing Your Carbon Footprint

>>  
>>

>> #### Climate Basics

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Climate Science

>>  
>>                       * Climate Impacts

>>  
>>                       * Extreme Weather

>>  
>>                       * Energy/Emissions Data

>>  
>>                       * Climate Classroom

>>  
>>

>> #### Our Work

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Climate Innovation 2050

>>  
>>                       * Business Environmental Leadership Council

>>  
>>                       * Solutions Forum

>>  
>>                       * Carbon Capture Coalition

>>  
>>                       * Mayors/Business Alliance for a Sustainable Future

>>  
>>                       * Climate Resilience

>>  
>>                       * International Dialogue

>>  
>>                       * Climate Leadership Conference and Awards

>>  
>>

>> #### About C2ES

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Board of Directors

>>  
>>                       * Experts and Staff

>>  
>>                       * Annual Reports, Finances, and Management

>>  
>>                       * Support our Work

>>  
>>                         * Celebrating 20 Years of Climate Solutions

>>  
>>                       * Career Opportunities

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policies

>>  
>>

>> #### Library

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Article

>>  
>>                       * Brief

>>  
>>                       * Chart

>>  
>>                       * Factsheet

>>  
>>                       * Map

>>  
>>                       * Paper

>>  
>>                       * Report

>>  
>>                       * Video

>>  
>>

>> ##### Climate Basics » Extreme Weather

>>

>> __Share

>>

>> ## Heat Waves and Climate Change

>>

>> Across the globe, hot days are getting hotter and more frequent, while
we’re experiencing fewer cold days. Over the past decade, daily record high
temperatures have occurred twice as often as record lows across the
continental United States, up from a near 1:1 ratio in the 1950s. Heat waves
are becoming more common, especially in the U.S. West, although in many parts
of the country the 1930s still holds the record for number of heat waves
(caused by the Dust Bowl and other factors).

>>

>> By midcentury, if greenhouse gas emissions are not significantly curtailed,
scientists expect 20 record highs for every record low. In parts of the South,
the frequency of days above 95 degrees Fahrenheit could triple, to over 75
days per year.

>>

>> ### Increase in Total U.S. Heatwave Days

>>

>>
![](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%200%200'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![](https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/uploads/2017/10/Heatwave_days2040-2070_HR-1.jpg)

>>

>> ###### Notes

>>

>> Map showing ratio of total heatwave days per summer (frequency times
duration) in the mid-21st century compared to the end of the 20th century.

>>

>> ###### Source

>>

>> NOAA Climate.gov map by Dan Pisut and Richard Rivera, based on data
provided by Mary Jo Nath and Gabriel Lau.

>>

>> ## Threats Posed by Extreme Heat

>>

>> Extreme heat can increase the risk of other types of disasters. Heat can
exacerbate drought. This, in turn, can encourage more extreme heat, as the
sun’s energy acts to heat the air and land surface, rather than to evaporate
water. Hot, dry conditions also increase the risk of wildfires.

>>

>> ### Human Health

>>

>> Extreme heat is the deadliest natural disaster in the United States,
killing more people on average (about 600 per year) than hurricanes,
lightning, tornadoes, earthquakes, and floods combined. The Billion Dollar
Weather Disasters database compiled by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration lists heat waves as four of the top 10 deadliest U.S. disasters
since 1980. Two heat waves in 1980 and 1988 were particularly deadly and
account for the vast majority of extreme weather-related deaths in the
database, with Hurricane Katrina (1,833 deaths) as the only non-heat wave
event that caused more than 500 fatalities.

>>

>> High humidity and elevated nighttime temperatures appear to be key
ingredients in causing heat-related illness and mortality. Heat stress occurs
in humans when the body is unable to cool itself effectively. Normally, the
body can cool itself through sweating, but when humidity is high, sweat will
not evaporate as quickly, potentially leading to heat stroke. When there’s no
break from the heat at night, it can cause discomfort and lead to health
problems, especially for the poor and elderly. Daily minimum temperatures in
the U.S. are increasing slightly faster than daily maximum temperatures.

>>

>> ### Agriculture

>>

>> High temperatures at night can be particularly damaging to agriculture.
Some crops require cool night temperatures, and heat stress for livestock
rises when animals are unable to cool off at night. Heat-stressed cattle can
experience declines in milk production, slower growth, and reduced conception
rates.

>>

>> ### Energy

>>

>> Higher summer temperatures will increase electricity demand for cooling, as
has been observed over the past 20 years. At the same time, higher
temperatures lower the ability of transmission lines to carry power, possibly
leading to electricity reliability issues during heat waves. Although warmer
winters will reduce the need for heating, modeling suggests that total U.S.
energy use will increase in a warmer future. In addition, as rivers and lakes
warm, their capacity for absorbing waste heat from power plants declines. This
can reduce the thermal efficiency of power production, make it difficult for
power plants to comply with environmental regulations regarding their cooling
water.

>>

>> ## How to Build Resilience

>>

>> Communities can bolster their resilience and reduce the impacts of extreme
heat by:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Creating heat preparedness
plans, identifying vulnerable

>>  
>>

>> populations, and opening cooling centers during extreme heat.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Using green roofs, improved
building materials, and shaded

>>  
>>

>> building construction to reduce the urban heat island effect.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pursuing energy efficiency to
reduce demand on the electricity

>>  
>>

>> grid, especially during heat waves.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Shading and cooling livestock,
breeding livestock selectively

>>  
>>

>> for heat tolerance, and switching to growing more heat-resistant crops.

>>

>> ### __Related Content

>>

>> ##### Drought and Climate Change

>>

>> Tags ImpactsScienceExtreme Weather

>>

>> View

>>

>> ##### Wildfires and Climate Change

>>

>> Tags ImpactsScienceExtreme Weather

>>

>> View

>>

>> View

>>

>> ###### Factsheet

>>

>> ##### Resilience Strategies for Extreme Heat

>>

>> Climate change is contributing to more frequent, severe, and longer heat
waves during summer months across the United Sates. The number of heatwaves
observed in 2011 and 2012 were triple the long-term average, and require
planning for economic, health and …

>>

>> View Details Download (pdf, 1 MB)

>>

>> ### __Other Resources

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Ready.gov Extreme Heat

>>  
>>                       * Heat Safety Tips, National Weather Service

>>  
>>                       * Extreme Heat, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention

>>  
>>

>> ##### Follow

>>  
>>                 >>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>

>> ##### Sign up for updates

>>

>> ##### Donate to C2ES

>>

>> Donate Today

>>

>>
![](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%200%200'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![](https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/themes/c2es/resources/img/c2es_white.png)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Policy Hub

>>  
>>                       * Climate Solutions

>>  
>>                       * Climate Basics

>>  
>>                       * Our Work

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                       * Library

>>  
>>

>> Designed by
![](data:image/svg+xml,%3Csvg%20xmlns='http://www.w3.org/2000/svg'%20viewBox='0%200%200%200'%3E%3C/svg%3E)![](https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/themes/c2es/resources/img/h7.png)

>>

>> ✕

>>

>> __

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

