
>

>> Skip to content

>>

>> ![Universe Today](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/cropped-pia22686-16.jpg)

>>

>> ![Universe Today](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/cropped-cleanutlogo-1.png)

>>

>> Universe Today

>>

>> Space and astronomy news

>>

>> ![](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2009/08/712129main_8247975848_88635d38a1_o.jpg)

>>

>> Posted on January 19, 2015December 23, 2015 by Elizabeth Howell

>>

>> # How Long Have Humans Been On Earth?

>>

>> While our ancestors have been around for about six million years, the
modern form of humans only evolved about 200,000 years ago. Civilization as we
know it is only about 6,000 years old, and industrialization started in the
earnest only in the 1800s. While we’ve accomplished much in that short time,
it also shows our responsibility as caretakers for the only planet we live on
right now.

>>

>> The effects of humans on Earth cannot be understated. We’ve been able to
survive in environments all over the world, even harsh ones such as
Antarctica. Every year, we fell forests and destroy other natural areas,
driving species into smaller areas or into endangerment, because of our need
to build more housing to contain our growing population.

>>

>> With seven billion people on Earth, pollution from industry and cars is a
growing element in climate change — which affects our planet in ways we can’t
predict. But we’re already seeing the effects in melting glaciers and rising
global temperatures.

>>

>> ![Enormous chuck of ice breaks off the Petermann Glacier in Greenland.

Credit: NASA.](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2010/08/petermann_tmo_2010217-580x290.jpg)Enormous chuck of
ice breaks off the Petermann Glacier in Greenland. Credit: NASA.

>>

>> The first tangible link to humanity started around six million years ago
with a primate group called Ardipithecus, according to the Smithsonian
Institution. Based in Africa, this group began the path of walking upright.
This is traditionally considered important because it allowed for more free
use of the hands for toolmaking, weaponry and other survival needs.

>>

>> The Australopithecus group, the museum added, took hold between about two
million and four million years ago, with the abilities to walk upright and
climb trees. Next came Paranthropus, which existed between about one million
and three million years ago. The group is distinguished by its larger teeth,
giving a wider diet.

>>

>> The Homo group — including our own species, Homo sapiens — began arising
more than two million years ago, the museum said. It’s distinguished by bigger
brains, more tool-making and the ability to reach far beyond Africa. Our
species was distinguished about 200,000 years ago and managed to survive and
thrive despite climate change at the time. While we started in temperate
climates, about 60,000 to 80,000 years ago the first humans began straying
outside of the continent in which our species was born.

>>

>> ![GOCE view of Africa.. Credits: ESA/HPF/DLR, anaglyph by Nathanial Burton-

Bradford.](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/GOCE-

Africa-580x464.jpg)GOCE view of Africa.. Credits: ESA/HPF/DLR, anaglyph by
Nathanial Burton-Bradford.

>>

>> “This great migration brought our species to a position of world dominance
that it has never relinquished,” reads a 2008 article in Smithsonian Magazine,
pointing out that eventually we obviated the competition (most prominently
including Neanderthals and Homo erectus). When the migration was complete,”
the article continues, “Homo sapiens was the last—and only—man standing.”

>>

>> Using genetic markers and an understanding of ancient geography, scientists
have partially reconstructed how humans could have made the journey. It’s
believed that the first explorers of Eurasia went there using the Bab-al-
Mandab Strait that now divides Yemen and Djibouti, according to National
Geographic. These people made it to India, then by 50,000 years ago, southeast
Asia and Australia.

>>

>> A little after this time, another group began an inland journey across the
Middle East and south-central Asia, positioning them to later go to Europe and
Asia, the magazine added. This proved important for North America, as about
20,000 years ago, some of these people crossed over to that continent using a
land bridge created by glaciation. From there, colonies have been found in
Asia dating as far back as 14,000 years ago.

>>

>> ![A teensy-tiny Neil Armstrong is visible in the helmet of Buzz Aldrin

during the Apollo 11 landing in July 1969. Credit:

NASA](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2013/10/apollo_11-554x580.jpg)A teensy-tiny Neil Armstrong is
visible in the helmet of Buzz Aldrin during the Apollo 11 landing in July
1969. Credit: NASA

>>

>> Since this is a space website, it’s also worth noting when humans began
leaving Earth. The first human mission to space took place April 12, 1961 when
Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin made a single orbit of Earth in his spacecraft,
Vostok 1. Humanity first set foot on another world on July 20, 1969, when
Americans Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin walked on the Moon.

>>

>> Since then, our colonization efforts in space have focused mostly on space
stations. The first space station was the Soviet Salyut 1, which launched from
Earth April 19, 1971 and was first occupied by Georgi Dobrovolski, Vladislav
Vokov, and Viktor Patsayev on June 6. The men died during re-entry June 29 due
to spacecraft decompression, meaning no further flights went to that station.

>>

>> There have been other space stations since. A notable example is Mir, which
hosted several long-duration missions of a year or more — including the
longest single spaceflight duration of any human to date, 437 days, by Valeri
Polyakov in 1994-95. The International Space Station launched its first piece
Nov. 20, 1998 and has been continuously occupied by humans since Oct. 31,
2000. The first humans to start the continuous occupation included Expedition
1 members Bill Shepard (U.S.) and Russian cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Yuri
Gidzenko.

>>

>> ### Share this:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Click to share on Facebook
(Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Pocket (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to print (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * More

>>  
>>                       *           * Click to email this to a friend (Opens
in new

>>  
>>

>> window)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ### Like this:

>>  
>>

>> Like Loading...

>>

>> CategoriesGuide to Space

>>

>> ## 2 Replies to "How Long Have Humans Been On Earth?"

>>  
>>                 >>                       1.

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/013c997976f8c36b28b59fdc9103228a?s=100&d=mm&r=g)
**Tim Reyes** says:

>>

>> January 19, 2015 at 8:15 PM

>>

>> Since the Tunguska impact in Russia in 1908, despite plagues and two World
Wars, the World's population doubled in 60 years. Then it has doubled again,
in 50 years to the present 7 billion. Quadrupling in a little over 100 years.
Just doubling of human population had taken one thousand year periods up until
the 20th Century. Industrialization including the Haber process - creating the
Green Revolution - is the cause. Today, industrialization and advanced
technology is now idling millions of young humans leading to the violence we
see. The sudden connectivity - bringing all humans into close cultural contact
has stressed many cultures not prepared to adjust and tolerate diversity.

>>  
>>                 >>                       2.

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4a577d4ad468301086cf16c32b05ef80?s=100&d=mm&r=g)
**kbutler** says:

>>

>> January 20, 2015 at 4:05 PM

>>

>> The comment in this article "Civilization as we know it is only about 6,000
years old.." fails to consider archeological sites such as Gobekli Tepe that
indicate functioning agricultural societies from of 12,000 years ago. Looking
further back, into the valleys now inundated with the Black Sea we can
logically surmise that man, in his present societal state has been here much
longer than 6000 years.

>>

>> The world began before 4004bc, Bishop Ushher, and society at least 12,000
years ago.

>>

>> Comments are closed.

>>

>> ## Post navigation

>>

>> Previous PostPrevious Politics Kept a Mission in Cold Storage and Delayed
for 12 Years, Launching Feb. 9th

>>

>> Next PostNext Here's Dawn's Best View of Ceres Yet

>>

>> ![Member Log in](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/members-1.png)  
>  ![Join our Patreon community](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/09/patreon.png)  
>  Join our 836 patrons! See no ads on this site, see our videos early,
special bonus material, and much more. Join us at patreon.com/universetoday

>>

>> ![](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/bookcover-e1540500928777.jpg) **Get our new book!**

>>

>> Search for: Search

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * Members

>>  
>>                       * Guide to Space

>>  
>>                       * Carnival

>>  
>>                       * Photos

>>  
>>                       * Videos

>>  
>>                       * Forum

>>  
>>                       * Contact

>>  
>>                       * Privacy

>>  
>>

>> Space stories from across the internet, sent to you by email.

>>

>> ## Subscribe to our Email Newsletter

>>

>>           * indicates required

>>

>> Email Address *

>>

>> First Name

>>

>> Last Name

>>

>> We won't use your email for any other purpose and you can unsubscribe any
time. Check out our privacy policy if you have any questions.

>>

>> ## Follow Us

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Twitter

>>  
>>                       * Instagram

>>  
>>                       * YouTube

>>  
>>                       * Facebook

>>  
>>                       * RSS Feed

>>  
>>                       * Twitch

>>  
>>

>> Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this
website, you agree to their use.  
>  To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here: Cookie Policy

>>

>> Privacy Policy Proudly powered by WordPress

>>

>> Send to Email Address Your Name Your Email Address
![loading](https://www.universetoday.com/wp-

content/plugins/jetpack/modules/sharedaddy/images/loading.gif) Cancel

>>

>> Post was not sent - check your email addresses!

>>

>> Email check failed, please try again

>>

>> Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.

>>

>> %d bloggers like this:

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

