
>

>> # Alternative fuel vehicle

>>

>> From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

>>

>> Jump to navigation Jump to search

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/61/2019_Toyota_Prius_%28ZVW50R%29_1.8_Hybrid_liftback_%282018-12-19%29_01.jpg/220px-2019_Toyota_Prius_%28ZVW50R%29_1.8_Hybrid_liftback_%282018-12-19%29_01.jpg)

>>

>> The Toyota Prius is the world's top selling hybrid electric vehicle, with
global sales of almost 4 million units through January 2017.[1]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7d/Piracicaba_10_2008_151_Gast_station_selling_four_fuels.jpg/220px-

Piracicaba_10_2008_151_Gast_station_selling_four_fuels.jpg)

>>

>> A Brazilian filling station with four alternative fuels for sale: biodiesel
(B3), gasohol (E25), neat ethanol (E100), and compressed natural gas (CNG).

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/be/Volt_charging_station.jpg/220px-

Volt_charging_station.jpg)

>>

>> The Chevrolet Volt family is the world's top selling plug-in hybrid, with
global sales of about 134,500 units as of December 2016[update].[2]

>>

>> An **alternative fuel vehicle** is a vehicle that runs on a fuel other than
traditional petroleum fuels (petrol or Diesel fuel); and also refers to any
technology of powering an engine that does not involve solely petroleum (e.g.
electric car, hybrid electric vehicles, solar powered). Because of a
combination of factors, such as environmental concerns, high oil prices and
the potential for peak oil, development of cleaner alternative fuels and
advanced power systems for vehicles has become a high priority for many
governments and vehicle manufacturers around the world.

>>

>> Hybrid electric vehicles such as the Toyota Prius are not actually
alternative fuel vehicles, but through advanced technologies in the electric
battery and motor/generator, they make a more efficient use of petroleum
fuel.[3] Other research and development efforts in alternative forms of power
focus on developing all-electric and fuel cell vehicles, and even the stored
energy of compressed air.

>>

>> An environmental analysis extends beyond just the operating efficiency and
emissions. A life-cycle assessment of a vehicle involves production and post-
use considerations. A cradle-to-cradle design is more important than a focus
on a single factor such as the type of fuel.[4][5]

>>

>> ## Contents

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 1 Global outlook

>>  
>>                       * 2 Single fuel source

>>  
>>                         * 2.1 Engine Air Compressor

>>  
>>                         * 2.2 Battery-electric

>>  
>>                           * 2.2.1 Solar

>>  
>>                         * 2.3 Dimethyl ether fuel

>>  
>>                         * 2.4 Ammonia fuelled vehicles

>>  
>>                         * 2.5 Biofuels

>>  
>>                           * 2.5.1 Bioalcohol and ethanol

>>  
>>                           * 2.5.2 Biodiesel

>>  
>>                           * 2.5.3 Biogas

>>  
>>                         * 2.6 Charcoal

>>  
>>                         * 2.7 Compressed natural gas (CNG)

>>  
>>                         * 2.8 Formic acid

>>  
>>                         * 2.9 Hydrogen

>>  
>>                         * 2.10 Liquid nitrogen car

>>  
>>                         * 2.11 Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)

>>  
>>                         * 2.12 Autogas (LPG)

>>  
>>                         * 2.13 Steam

>>  
>>                         * 2.14 Wood gas

>>  
>>                       * 3 Multiple fuel source

>>  
>>                         * 3.1 Dual Fuel

>>  
>>                         * 3.2 Flexible fuel

>>  
>>                         * 3.3 Hybrids

>>  
>>                           * 3.3.1 Hybrid electric vehicle

>>  
>>                           * 3.3.2 Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle

>>  
>>                           * 3.3.3 Pedal-assisted electric hybrid vehicle

>>  
>>                       * 4 Comparative assessment of fossil and alternative
fuels

>>  
>>                       * 5 See also

>>  
>>                       * 6 References

>>  
>>                       * 7 External links

>>  
>>

>> ## Global outlook[edit]

>>

>> As of 2017[update], there were more than 1.4 billion motor vehicles on the
world's roads,[6] compared with just more than 116 million alternative fuel
and advanced technology vehicles that had been sold or converted worldwide at
the end of 2016 and consisting of:

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ea/BSB_03_2013_Hyundai_HB20_Flex_6208_w_flex_badge.jpg/220px-

BSB_03_2013_Hyundai_HB20_Flex_6208_w_flex_badge.jpg)

>>

>> Brazil is the world's leader in flexible-fuel car sales, with cumulative
sales totalling 25.5 million units as of June 2015[update] .[7]

>>  
>>                 >>                       * About 55 million flex fuel
automobiles, motorcycles and light

>>  
>>

>> duty trucks manufactured and sold worldwide by mid 2015, led by Brazil with
29.5 million by mid 2015,[7][8] followed by the United States with 17.4
million by the end of 2014,[9] Canada with about 1.6 million by 2014,[10] and
Sweden with 243,100 through December 2014.[11][12][13] The Brazilian flex fuel
fleet includes over 4 million flexible-fuel motorcycles produced since 2009
through March 2015.[8]

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 22.7 million natural gas
vehicles as of August 2015[update], led

>>  
>>

>> by China (4.4 million) Iran with 4.00 million, followed by Pakistan (3.70
million), Argentina (2.48 million), India (1.80 million) and Brazil (1.78
million).[14]

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 24.9 million LPG powered
vehicles by December 2013, led by

>>  
>>

>> Turkey with 3.93 million, South Korea (2.4 million), and Poland (2.75
million).[15]

>>  
>>                 >>                       * More than 12 million hybrid
electric vehicles have been sold

>>  
>>

>> worldwide.[1][16] As of April 2016[update], Japan ranked as the market
leader with more than 5 million hybrids sold, followed by the United States
with cumulative sales of over 4 million units since 1999, and Europe with
about 1.5 million hybrids delivered since 2000.[16] As of January
2017[update], global sales are by Toyota Motor Company with more than 10
million Lexus and Toyota hybrids sold,[1] followed by Honda Motor Co., Ltd.
with cumulative global sales of more than 1.35 million hybrids as of June
2014[update].[17][18][19] As of January 2017[update], global hybrid sales are
led by the Prius family, with cumulative sales of 6.1 million units.[1] The
Toyota Prius liftback is the world's top selling hybrid electric car with
cumulative sales of 3.985 million units through January 2017.[1]

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 5.7 million neat-ethanol only
light-vehicles built in Brazil

>>  
>>

>> since 1979,[20] with 2.4 to 3.0 million vehicles still in use by
2003.[21][22] and 1.22 million units as of December 2011.[23]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/94/2014_Tesla_Model_S_in_Germany.jpg/220px-2014_Tesla_Model_S_in_Germany.jpg)

>>

>> The Tesla Model S all-electric car is the world's second best-selling plug-
in electric car with more than 150,000 units sold as of December
2016[update].[2]

>>  
>>                 >>                       * More than 4 million highway-
legal plug-in electric passenger

>>  
>>

>> cars and light utility vehicles had been sold worldwide at the end of
September 2018.[24] Cumulative global sales of all-electric cars and vans
passed the 1 million unit milestone in September 2016.[25] As of September
2018[update], the Nissan Leaf is the world's all-time top selling highway-
capable plug-in electric car, with global sales of over 350,000 units since
its inception.[26] As of December 2016[update], ranking second was the all-
electric Tesla Model S with about over 158,000 units, followed by the
Chevrolet Volt plug-in hybrid, which together with its sibling the
Opel/Vauxhall Ampera has combined global sales of about 134,500 units, and the
Mitsubishi Outlander P-HEV, with global sales of about 119,500 units.[2]

>>  
>>                 >>                 As of September 2018[update], China has
the world's largest stock of

>>  
>>

>> highway legal plug-in electric passenger cars with cumulative sales of
almost 2 million units.[27] Among country markets, the United States ranks
second with 1 million plug-in electric cars sold through September
2018.[28]Cumulative sales of highway legal plug-in electric cars and vans in
Europe achieved the one million unit milestone in June 2018.[29] As of
September 2018[update], sales in the European light-duty plug-in electric
segment are led by Norway with almost 275,000 units registered.[30] China is
the world's leader in the plug-in heavy-duty segment, including electric all-
electric buses, and plug-in commercial and sanitation trucks. The stock of new
energy vehicles sold in China totaled 2.21 million units up until September
2018.[27] As of December 2015[update], China was the world's largest plug-in
electric bus market with a stock of almost 173,000 vehicles.[31]

>>

>> ## Single fuel source[edit]

>>

>> ### Engine Air Compressor[edit]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/11/Peugeot_2008_HYbrid_air_SAO_2014_0299.JPG/220px-

Peugeot_2008_HYbrid_air_SAO_2014_0299.JPG)

>>

>> The Peugeot 2008 HYbrid air prototype replaced conventional hybrid
batteries with a compressed air propulsion system

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-

new.svg/50px-Question_book-new.svg.png)

>>

>> |

>>

>> This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
>  _Find sources:_ "Alternative fuel vehicle" – news **·** newspapers **·**
books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( September 2008)_ _(Learn how and when to
remove this template message)_

>>

>> ---|---

>>

>> Main articles: Compressed-air engine, Compressed-air vehicle, and
Compressed-air car

>>

>> The air engine is an emission-free piston engine that uses compressed air
as a source of energy. The first compressed air car was invented by a French
engineer named Guy Nègre. The expansion of compressed air may be used to drive
the pistons in a modified piston engine. Efficiency of operation is gained
through the use of environmental heat at normal temperature to warm the
otherwise cold expanded air from the storage tank. This non-adiabatic
expansion has the potential to greatly increase the efficiency of the machine.
The only exhaust is cold air (−15 °C), which could also be used to air
condition the car. The source for air is a pressurized carbon-fiber tank. Air
is delivered to the engine via a rather conventional injection system. Unique
crank design within the engine increases the time during which the air charge
is warmed from ambient sources and a two-stage process allows improved heat
transfer rates.

>>

>> ### Battery-electric[edit]

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-

new.svg/50px-Question_book-new.svg.png)

>>

>> |

>>

>> This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
>  _Find sources:_ "Alternative fuel vehicle" – news **·** newspapers **·**
books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( September 2008)_ _(Learn how and when to
remove this template message)_

>>

>> ---|---

>>

>> Main articles: Battery electric vehicle and Electric car

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/48/EV1_%286%29.jpg/220px-

EV1_%286%29.jpg)

>>

>> General Motors EV1 electric car.

>>

>> Battery electric vehicles (BEVs), also known as all-electric vehicles
(AEVs), are electric vehicles whose main energy storage is in the chemical
energy of batteries. BEVs are the most common form of what is defined by the
California Air Resources Board (CARB) as zero emission vehicle (ZEV) because
they produce no tailpipe emissions at the point of operation. The electrical
energy carried on board a BEV to power the motors is obtained from a variety
of battery chemistries arranged into battery packs. For additional range
genset trailers or pusher trailers are sometimes used, forming a type of
hybrid vehicle. Batteries used in electric vehicles include "flooded" lead-
acid, absorbed glass mat, NiCd, nickel metal hydride, Li-ion, Li-poly and
zinc-air batteries.

>>

>> Attempts at building viable, modern battery-powered electric vehicles began
in the 1950s with the introduction of the first modern (transistor controlled)
electric car – the Henney Kilowatt, even though the concept was out in the
market since 1890. Despite the poor sales of the early battery-powered
vehicles, development of various battery-powered vehicles continued through
the mid-1990s, with such models as the General Motors EV1 and the Toyota RAV4
EV.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/2018_Nissan_Leaf_Tekna_Front.jpg/220px-2018_Nissan_Leaf_Tekna_Front.jpg)

>>

>> The Nissan Leaf is the world's top selling highway-capable all-electric
car. The Leaf achieved the milestone of 250,000 units sold globally in
December 2016.[32]

>>

>> Battery powered cars had primarily used lead-acid batteries and NiMH
batteries. Lead-acid batteries' recharge capacity is considerably reduced if
they're discharged beyond 75% on a regular basis, making them a less-than-
ideal solution. NiMH batteries are a better choice[ _citation needed_ ], but
are considerably more expensive than lead-acid. Lithium-ion battery powered
vehicles such as the Venturi Fetish and the Tesla Roadster have recently
demonstrated excellent performance and range, and nevertheless is used in most
mass production models launched since December 2010.

>>

>> As of December 2015[update], several neighborhood electric vehicles, city
electric cars and series production highway-capable electric cars and utility
vans have been made available for retails sales, including Tesla Roadster, GEM
cars, Buddy, Mitsubishi i MiEV and its rebadged versions Peugeot iOn and
Citroën C-Zero, Chery QQ3 EV, JAC J3 EV, Nissan Leaf, Smart ED, Mia electric,
BYD e6, Renault Kangoo Z.E., Bolloré Bluecar, Renault Fluence Z.E., Ford Focus
Electric, BMW ActiveE, Renault Twizy, Tesla Model S, Honda Fit EV, RAV4 EV
second generation, Renault Zoe, Mitsubishi Minicab MiEV, Roewe E50, Chevrolet
Spark EV, Fiat 500e, BMW i3, Volkswagen e-Up!, Nissan e-NV200, Volkswagen
e-Golf, Mercedes-Benz B-Class Electric Drive, Kia Soul EV, BYD e5, and Tesla
Model X.[33] The world's all-time top selling highway legal electric car is
the Nissan Leaf, released in December 2010, with global sales of more than
250,000 units through December 2016.[32] The Tesla Model S, released in June
2012, ranks second with global sales of over 158,000 cars delivered as of
December 2016[update].[32] The Renault Kangoo Z.E. utility van is the leader
of the light-duty all-electric segment with global sales of 25,205 units
through December 2016.[34]

>>

>> #### Solar[edit]

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-

new.svg/50px-Question_book-new.svg.png)

>>

>> |

>>

>> This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
>  _Find sources:_ "Alternative fuel vehicle" – news **·** newspapers **·**
books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( September 2008)_ _(Learn how and when to
remove this template message)_

>>

>> ---|---

>>

>> See also: Solar vehicle, Solar car racing, and List of solar car teams

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1e/Nuna3Team.JPG/200px-

Nuna3Team.JPG)

>>

>> Nuna team at a racecourse.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/26/Nuna3atZandvoort1.JPG/200px-

Nuna3atZandvoort1.JPG)

>>

>> Nuna solar powered car, which has travelled up to 140km/h (84mph).

>>

>> A solar car is an electric vehicle powered by solar energy obtained from
solar panels on the car. Solar panels cannot currently be used to directly
supply a car with a suitable amount of power at this time, but they can be
used to extend the range of electric vehicles. They are raced in competitions
such as the World Solar Challenge and the North American Solar Challenge.
These events are often sponsored by Government agencies such as the United
States Department of Energy keen to promote the development of alternative
energy technology such as solar cells and electric vehicles. Such challenges
are often entered by universities to develop their students engineering and
technological skills as well as motor vehicle manufacturers such as GM and
Honda.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/1f/Trev_solar_car.png/200px-

Trev_solar_car.png)

>>

>> Trev's battery lasts over 250,000 kilometres.

>>

>> The North American Solar Challenge is a solar car race across North
America. Originally called Sunrayce, organized and sponsored by General Motors
in 1990, it was renamed American Solar Challenge in 2001, sponsored by the
United States Department of Energy and the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory. Teams from universities in the United States and Canada compete in
a long distance test of endurance as well as efficiency, driving thousands of
miles on regular highways.

>>

>> Nuna is the name of a series of manned solar powered vehicles that won the
World solar challenge in Australia three times in a row, in 2001 (Nuna 1 or
just Nuna), 2003 (Nuna 2) and 2005 (Nuna 3). The Nunas are built by students
of the Delft University of Technology.

>>

>> The World solar challenge is a solar powered car race over 3,021 kilometres
(1,877 mi) through central Australia from Darwin to Adelaide. The race
attracts teams from around the world, most of which are fielded by
universities or corporations although some are fielded by high schools.

>>

>> Trev (two-seater renewable energy vehicle) was designed by the staff and
students at the University of South Australia. Trev was first displayed at the
2005 World Solar Challenge as the concept of a low-mass, efficient commuter
car. With 3 wheels and a mass of about 300 kg, the prototype car had maximum
speed of 120 km/h and acceleration of 0–100 km/h in about 10 seconds. The
running cost of Trev is projected to be less than 1/10 of the running cost of
a small petrol car.

>>

>> ### Dimethyl ether fuel[edit]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/06/Chemrec_5_-_small.JPG/220px-

Chemrec_5_-_small.JPG)

>>

>> Installation of BioDME synthesis towers at Chemrec's pilot facility

>>

>> Dimethyl ether (DME) is a promising fuel in diesel engines,[35] petrol
engines (30% DME / 70% LPG), and gas turbines owing to its high cetane number,
which is 55, compared to diesel's, which is 40–53.[36][37] Only moderate
modification are needed to convert a diesel engine to burn DME. The simplicity
of this short carbon chain compound leads during combustion to very low
emissions of particulate matter, NOx, CO. For these reasons as well as being
sulfur-free, DME meets even the most stringent emission regulations in Europe
(EURO5), U.S. (U.S. 2010), and Japan (2009 Japan).[38] Mobil is using DME in
their methanol to gasoline process.

>>

>> DME is being developed as a synthetic second generation biofuel (BioDME),
which can be manufactured from lignocellulosic biomass.[39] Currently the EU
is considering BioDME in its potential biofuel mix in 2030;[40] the Volvo
Group is the coordinator for the European Community Seventh Framework
Programme project BioDME[41][42] where Chemrec's BioDME pilot plant based on
black liquor gasification is nearing completion in Piteå, Sweden.[43]

>>

>> ### Ammonia fuelled vehicles[edit]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/AmmoniacalGasEngineStreetcarARWaud.jpeg/220px-

AmmoniacalGasEngineStreetcarARWaud.jpeg)

>>

>> Ammoniacal Gas Engine Streetcar in New Orleans drawn by Alfred Waud in
1871.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/82/X-15.jpg/220px-X-15.jpg)

>>

>> The X-15 aircraft used ammonia as one component fuel of its rocket engine

>>

>> Ammonia is produced by combining gaseous hydrogen with nitrogen from the
air. Large-scale ammonia production uses natural gas for the source of
hydrogen. Ammonia was used during World War II to power buses in Belgium, and
in engine and solar energy applications prior to 1900. Liquid ammonia also
fuelled the Reaction Motors XLR99 rocket engine, that powered the X-15
hypersonic research aircraft. Although not as powerful as other fuels, it left
no soot in the reusable rocket engine and its density approximately matches
the density of the oxidizer, liquid oxygen, which simplified the aircraft's
design.

>>

>> Ammonia has been proposed as a practical alternative to fossil fuel for
internal combustion engines.[44] The calorific value of ammonia is 22.5 MJ/kg
(9690 BTU/lb), which is about half that of diesel. In a normal engine, in
which the water vapour is not condensed, the calorific value of ammonia will
be about 21% less than this figure. It can be used in existing engines with
only minor modifications to carburettors/injectors.

>>

>> If produced from coal, the CO2 can be readily sequestered[44][45] (the
combustion products are nitrogen and water).

>>

>> Ammonia engines or ammonia motors, using ammonia as a working fluid, have
been proposed and occasionally used.[46] The principle is similar to that used
in a fireless locomotive, but with ammonia as the working fluid, instead of
steam or compressed air. Ammonia engines were used experimentally in the 19th
century by Goldsworthy Gurney in the UK and in streetcars in New Orleans. In
1981 a Canadian company converted a 1981 Chevrolet Impala to operate using
ammonia as fuel.[47][48]

>>

>> Ammonia and GreenNH3 is being used with success by developers in
Canada,[49] since it can run in spark ignited or diesel engines with minor
modifications, also the only green fuel to power jet engines, and despite its
toxicity is reckoned to be no more dangerous than petrol or LPG.[50] It can be
made from renewable electricity, and having half the density of petrol or
diesel can be readily carried in sufficient quantities in vehicles. On
complete combustion it has no emissions other than nitrogen and water vapour.
The combustion chemical formula is 4 NH3 + 3 O2 → 2 N2 + 6 H2O, 75% water is
the result.

>>

>> ### Biofuels[edit]

>>

>> Main article: Biofuel

>>

>> #### Bioalcohol and ethanol[edit]

>>

>> See also: Alcohol fuel, Ethanol fuel, Methanol economy, Methanol fuel,
Common ethanol fuel mixtures, Flexible-fuel vehicle, E85, and Biobutanol

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/15/Late_model_Ford_Model_T.jpg/220px-

Late_model_Ford_Model_T.jpg)

>>

>> The Ford Model T was the first commercial flex-fuel vehicle. The engine was
capable of running on gasoline or ethanol, or a mix of both.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e3/Wiki_cars1_005.jpg/220px-

Wiki_cars1_005.jpg)

>>

>> The 1996 Ford Taurus was the first flexible-fuel vehicle produced with
versions capable of running with either ethanol (E85) or methanol (M85)
blended with gasoline.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/36/BSB_Flex_cars_190_09_2008_Gol_TotalFlex_1_6_2003.jpg/220px-

BSB_Flex_cars_190_09_2008_Gol_TotalFlex_1_6_2003.jpg)

>>

>> The 2003 VW Gol 1.6 Total Flex was the first commercial flexible-fuel
vehicle in the Brazilian market, capable of running on any mixture of gasoline
(E20 to E25 blend) and ethanol (E100).

>>

>> The first commercial vehicle that used ethanol as a fuel was the Ford Model
T, produced from 1908 through 1927. It was fitted with a carburetor with
adjustable jetting, allowing use of gasoline or ethanol, or a combination of
both.[51][52][53] Other car manufactures also provided engines for ethanol
fuel use.[54] In the United States, alcohol fuel was produced in corn-alcohol
stills until Prohibition criminalized the production of alcohol in 1919. The
use of alcohol as a fuel for internal combustion engines, either alone or in
combination with other fuels, lapsed until the oil price shocks of the 1970s.
Furthermore, additional attention was gained because of its possible
environmental and long-term economical advantages over fossil fuel.

>>

>> Both ethanol and methanol have been used as an automotive fuel.[55] While
both can be obtained from petroleum or natural gas, ethanol has attracted more
attention because it is considered a renewable resource, easily obtained from
sugar or starch in crops and other agricultural produce such as grain,
sugarcane, sugar beets or even lactose. Since ethanol occurs in nature
whenever yeast happens to find a sugar solution such as overripe fruit, most
organisms have evolved some tolerance to ethanol, whereas methanol is toxic.
Other experiments involve butanol, which can also be produced by fermentation
of plants. Support for ethanol comes from the fact that it is a biomass fuel,
which addresses climate change and greenhouse gas emissions, though these
benefits are now highly debated,[54][56] [57] [58] including the heated 2008
food vs fuel debate.

>>

>> Most modern cars are designed to run on gasoline are capable of running
with a blend from 10% up to 15% ethanol mixed into gasoline (E10-E15). With a
small amount of redesign, gasoline-powered vehicles can run on ethanol
concentrations as high as 85% (E85), the maximum set in the United States and
Europe due to cold weather during the winter,[59] or up to 100% (E100) in
Brazil, with a warmer climate. Ethanol has close to 34% less energy per volume
than gasoline,[60][61] consequently fuel economy ratings with ethanol blends
are significantly lower than with pure gasoline, but this lower energy content
does not translate directly into a 34% reduction in mileage, because there are
many other variables that affect the performance of a particular fuel in a
particular engine, and also because ethanol has a higher octane rating which
is beneficial to high compression ratio engines.

>>

>> For this reason, for pure or high ethanol blends to be attractive for
users, its price must be lower than gasoline to offset the lower fuel economy.
As a rule of thumb, Brazilian consumers are frequently advised by the local
media to use more alcohol than gasoline in their mix only when ethanol prices
are 30% lower or more than gasoline, as ethanol price fluctuates heavily
depending on the results and seasonal harvests of sugar cane and by
region.[62][63] In the US, and based on EPA tests for all 2006 E85 models, the
average fuel economy for E85 vehicles was found 25.56% lower than unleaded
gasoline.[54] The EPA-rated mileage of current American flex-fuel vehicles[64]
could be considered when making price comparisons, though E85 has octane
rating of about 104 and could be used as a substitute for premium gasoline.
Regional retail E85 prices vary widely across the US, with more favorable
prices in the Midwest region, where most corn is grown and ethanol produced.
In August 2008 the US average spread between the price of E85 and gasoline was
16.9%, while in Indiana was 35%, 30% in Minnesota and Wisconsin, 19% in
Maryland, 12 to 15% in California, and just 3% in Utah.[65] Depending of the
vehicle capabilities, the break even price of E85 usually has to be between 25
and 30% lower than gasoline.[54]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ef/E85_fuel_pump_7562_DCA_09_2009.jpg/220px-E85_fuel_pump_7562_DCA_09_2009.jpg)

>>

>> E85 fuel sold at a regular gasoline station in Washington, D.C..

>>

>> Reacting to the high price of oil and its growing dependence on imports, in
1975 Brazil launched the Pro-alcool program, a huge government-subsidized
effort to manufacture ethanol fuel (from its sugar cane crop) and ethanol-
powered automobiles. These ethanol-only vehicles were very popular in the
1980s, but became economically impractical when oil prices fell – and sugar
prices rose – late in that decade. In May 2003 Volkswagen built for the first
time a commercial ethanol flexible fuel car, the Gol 1.6 Total Flex. These
vehicles were a commercial success and by early 2009 other nine Brazilian
manufacturers are producing flexible fuel vehicles: Chevrolet, Fiat, Ford,
Peugeot, Renault, Honda, Mitsubishi, Toyota, Citroën, and Nissan.[20][66] The
adoption of the flex technology was so rapid, that flexible fuel cars reached
87.6% of new car sales in July 2008.[67] As of August 2008, the fleet of
"flex" automobiles and light commercial vehicles had reached 6 million new
vehicles sold,[68] representing almost 19% of all registered light
vehicles.[69] The rapid success of "flex" vehicles, as they are popularly
known, was made possible by the existence of 33,000 filling stations with at
least one ethanol pump available by 2006, a heritage of the _Pro-alcool_
program.[70][71]

>>

>> In the United States, initial support to develop alternative fuels by the
government was also a response to the 1973 oil crisis, and later on, as a goal
to improve air quality. Also, liquid fuels were preferred over gaseous fuels
not only because they have a better volumetric energy density but also because
they were the most compatible fuels with existing distribution systems and
engines, thus avoiding a big departure from the existing technologies and
taking advantage of the vehicle and the refueling infrastructure.[55]
California led the search of sustainable alternatives with interest in
methanol.[55] In 1996, a new FFV Ford Taurus was developed, with models fully
capable of running either methanol or ethanol blended with gasoline.[55][72]
This ethanol version of the Taurus was the first commercial production of an
E85 FFV.[73] The momentum of the FFV production programs at the American car
companies continued, although by the end of the 90's, the emphasis was on the
FFV E85 version, as it is today.[55] Ethanol was preferred over methanol
because there is a large support in the farming community and thanks to
government's incentive programs and corn-based ethanol subsidies.[74] Sweden
also tested both the M85 and the E85 flexifuel vehicles, but due to
agriculture policy, in the end emphasis was given to the ethanol flexifuel
vehicles.[75]

>>

>> #### Biodiesel[edit]

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-

new.svg/50px-Question_book-new.svg.png)

>>

>> |

>>

>> This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
>  _Find sources:_ "Alternative fuel vehicle" – news **·** newspapers **·**
books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( September 2008)_ _(Learn how and when to
remove this template message)_

>>

>> ---|---

>>

>> Main article: Biodiesel

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5c/Soybeanbus.jpg/200px-

Soybeanbus.jpg)

>>

>> Bus running on soybean biodiesel

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/79/Biodiesel_B20_pump_DCA_07_2010_9832.jpg/200px-

Biodiesel_B20_pump_DCA_07_2010_9832.jpg)

>>

>> Biodiesel (B20) pump in the U.S.

>>

>> The main benefit of Diesel combustion engines is that they have a 44% fuel
burn efficiency; compared with just 25–30% in the best gasoline engines.[76]
In addition diesel fuel has slightly higher Energy Density by volume than
gasoline. This makes Diesel engines capable of achieving much better fuel
economy than gasoline vehicles.

>>

>> Biodiesel (Fatty acid methyl ester), is commercially available in most
oilseed-producing states in the United States. As of 2005, it is somewhat more
expensive than fossil diesel, though it is still commonly produced in
relatively small quantities (in comparison to petroleum products and ethanol).
Many farmers who raise oilseeds use a biodiesel blend in tractors and
equipment as a matter of policy, to foster production of biodiesel and raise
public awareness. It is sometimes easier to find biodiesel in rural areas than
in cities. Biodiesel has lower Energy Density than fossil diesel fuel, so
biodiesel vehicles are not quite able to keep up with the fuel economy of a
fossil fuelled diesel vehicle, if the diesel injection system is not reset for
the new fuel. If the injection timing is changed to take account of the higher
Cetane value of biodiesel, the difference in economy is negligible. Because
biodiesel contains more oxygen than diesel or vegetable oil fuel, it produces
the lowest emissions from diesel engines, and is lower in most emissions than
gasoline engines. Biodiesel has a higher lubricity than mineral diesel and is
an additive in European pump diesel for lubricity and emissions reduction.

>>

>> Some Diesel-powered cars can run with minor modifications on 100% pure
vegetable oils. Vegetable oils tend to thicken (or solidify if it is waste
cooking oil), in cold weather conditions so vehicle modifications (a two tank
system with diesel start/stop tank), are essential in order to heat the fuel
prior to use under most circumstances. Heating to the temperature of engine
coolant reduces fuel viscosity, to the range cited by injection system
manufacturers, for systems prior to 'common rail' or 'unit injection ( VW PD)'
systems. Waste vegetable oil, especially if it has been used for a long time,
may become hydrogenated and have increased acidity. This can cause the
thickening of fuel, gumming in the engine and acid damage of the fuel system.
Biodiesel does not have this problem, because it is chemically processed to be
PH neutral and lower viscosity. Modern low emission diesels (most often Euro
-3 and -4 compliant), typical of the current production in the European
industry, would require extensive modification of injector system, pumps and
seals etc. due to the higher operating pressures, that are designed thinner
(heated) mineral diesel than ever before, for atomisation, if they were to use
pure vegetable oil as fuel. Vegetable oil fuel is not suitable for these
vehicles as they are currently produced. This reduces the market as increasing
numbers of new vehicles are not able to use it. However, the German Elsbett
company has successfully produced single tank vegetable oil fuel systems for
several decades, and has worked with Volkswagen on their TDI engines. This
shows that it is technologically possible to use vegetable oil as a fuel in
high efficiency / low emission diesel engines.

>>

>> Greasestock is an event held yearly in Yorktown Heights, New York, and is
one of the largest showcases of vehicles using waste oil as a biofuel in the
United States.[77][78][79][80]

>>

>> #### Biogas[edit]

>>

>> Main article: Biogas

>>

>> Compressed Biogas may be used for Internal Combustion Engines after
purification of the raw gas. The removal of H2O, H2S and particles can be seen
as standard producing a gas which has the same quality as Compressed Natural
Gas. The use of biogas is particularly interesting for climates where the
waste heat of a biogas powered power plant cannot be used during the
summer.[50][81]

>>

>> ### Charcoal[edit]

>>

>> In the 1930s Tang Zhongming made an invention using abundant charcoal
resources for Chinese auto market. The Charcoal-fuelled car was later used
intensively in China, serving the army and conveyancer after the breakout of
World War II.

>>

>> ### Compressed natural gas (CNG)[edit]

>>

>> Main article: Natural gas vehicle

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/7e/SAO_09_2008_Fiat_Siena_TetraFuel_2_views_v1.jpg/200px-

SAO_09_2008_Fiat_Siena_TetraFuel_2_views_v1.jpg)

>>

>> The Brazilian Fiat Siena Tetrafuel 1.4, the first multifuel car that runs
as a flexible-fuel on pure gasoline, or E25, or E100; or runs as a bi-fuel
with natural gas (CNG).

>>

>> High-pressure compressed natural gas, mainly composed of methane, that is
used to fuel normal combustion engines instead of gasoline. Combustion of
methane produces the least amount of CO2 of all fossil fuels. Gasoline cars
can be retrofitted to CNG and become bifuel Natural gas vehicles (NGVs) as the
gasoline tank is kept. The driver can switch between CNG and gasoline during
operation. Natural gas vehicles (NGVs) are popular in regions or countries
where natural gas is abundant. Widespread use began in the Po River Valley of
Italy, and later became very popular in New Zealand by the eighties, though
its use has declined.[82]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bc/Metrobus_powered_with_CNG_5198_DCA_03_2009.jpg/200px-

Metrobus_powered_with_CNG_5198_DCA_03_2009.jpg)

>>

>> Buses powered with CNG are common in the United States.

>>

>> As of December 2012[update], there were 17.8 million natural gas vehicles
worldwide, led by Iran with 3.30 million, followed by Pakistan (2.79 million),
Argentina (2.29 million), Brazil (1.75 million), China (1.58 million) and
India (1.5 million).[14] As of 2010, the Asia-Pacific region led the global
market with a share of 54%.[83] In Europe they are popular in Italy (730,000),
Ukraine (200,000), Armenia (101,352), Russia (100,000) and Germany
(91,500),[83] and they are becoming more so as various manufacturers produce
factory made cars, buses, vans and heavy vehicles.[81] In the United States
CNG powered buses are the favorite choice of several public transit agencies,
with an estimated CNG bus fleet of some 130,000.[84] Other countries where
CNG-powered buses are popular include India, Australia, Argentina, and
Germany.[82]

>>

>> CNG vehicles are common in South America, where these vehicles are mainly
used as taxicabs in main cities of Argentina and Brazil. Normally, standard
gasoline vehicles are retrofitted in specialized shops, which involve
installing the gas cylinder in the trunk and the CNG injection system and
electronics. The Brazilian GNV fleet is concentrated in the cities of Rio de
Janeiro and São Paulo.[85] Pike Research reports that almost 90% of NGVs in
Latin America have bi-fuel engines, allowing these vehicles to run on either
gasoline or CNG.[86]

>>

>> In 2006 the Brazilian subsidiary of FIAT introduced the Fiat Siena Tetra
fuel, a four-fuel car developed under Magneti Marelli of Fiat Brazil.[87][88]
This automobile can run on 100% ethanol (E100), E25 (Brazil's normal ethanol
gasoline blend), pure gasoline (not available in Brazil), and natural gas, and
switches from the gasoline-ethanol blend to CNG automatically, depending on
the power required by road conditions.[89] Other existing option is to
retrofit an ethanol flexible-fuel vehicle to add a natural gas tank and the
corresponding injection system. Some taxicabs in São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, run on this option, allowing the user to choose among three fuels
(E25, E100 and CNG) according to current market prices at the pump. Vehicles
with this adaptation are known in Brazil as "tri-fuel" cars.[90]

>>

>> HCNG or Hydrogen enriched Compressed Natural Gas for automobile use is
premixed at the hydrogen station.

>>

>> ### Formic acid[edit]

>>

>> Main article: Formic acid

>>

>> Formic acid is used by converting it first to hydrogen, and using that in a
fuel cell. Formic acid is much easier to store than hydrogen.[91][92]

>>

>> ### Hydrogen[edit]

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-

new.svg/50px-Question_book-new.svg.png)

>>

>> |

>>

>> This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
>  _Find sources:_ "Alternative fuel vehicle" – news **·** newspapers **·**
books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( September 2008)_ _(Learn how and when to
remove this template message)_

>>

>> ---|---

>>

>> Main articles: Hydrogen vehicle and Hydrogen economy

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e0/FCX_Clarity.jpg/220px-

FCX_Clarity.jpg)

>>

>> The 2009 Honda FCX Clarity is a hydrogen fuel cell automobile launched to
the market in 2008.

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/68/Hydrogen_vehicle.jpg)

>>

>> Hydrogen fueling station in California.

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5d/DSCN1474.JPG/220px-

DSCN1474.JPG)

>>

>> Sequel, a hydrogen fuel cell-powered vehicle from General Motors.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f2/Hyundai_ix35_-_Mondial_de_l%27Automobile_de_Paris_2014_-_003.jpg/220px-

Hyundai_ix35_-_Mondial_de_l%27Automobile_de_Paris_2014_-_003.jpg)

>>

>> The Hyundai ix35 FCEV was released for leasing in the U.S. in 2014.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/ba/Mirai_trimmed.jpg/220px-

Mirai_trimmed.jpg)

>>

>> The Toyota Mirai is one of the first hydrogen fuel-cell vehicles to be sold
commercially to retail customers, initially, only in Japan and
California.[93][94]

>>

>> A hydrogen car is an automobile which uses hydrogen as its primary source
of power for locomotion. These cars generally use the hydrogen in one of two
methods: combustion or fuel-cell conversion. In combustion, the hydrogen is
"burned" in engines in fundamentally the same method as traditional gasoline
cars. In fuel-cell conversion, the hydrogen is turned into electricity through
fuel cells which then powers electric motors. With either method, the only
byproduct from the spent hydrogen is water, however during combustion with air
NOx can be produced.

>>

>> Honda introduced its fuel cell vehicle in 1999 called the FCX and have
since then introduced the second generation FCX Clarity. Limited marketing of
the FCX Clarity, based on the 2007 concept model, began in June 2008 in the
United States, and it was introduced in Japan in November 2008.[95] The FCX
Clarity was available in the U.S. only in Los Angeles Area, where 16 hydrogen
filling stations are available, and until July 2009, only 10 drivers have
leased the Clarity for US$600 a month. At the 2012 World Hydrogen Energy
Conference, Daimler AG, Honda, Hyundai and Toyota all confirmed plans to
produce hydrogen fuel cell vehicles for sale by 2015, with some types planned
to enter the showroom in 2013.[96] From 2008 to 2014, Honda leased a total of
45 FCX units in the US.[97]

>>

>> A small number of prototype hydrogen cars currently exist, and a
significant amount of research is underway to make the technology more viable.
The common internal combustion engine, usually fueled with gasoline (petrol)
or diesel liquids, can be converted to run on gaseous hydrogen. However, the
most efficient use of hydrogen involves the use of fuel cells and electric
motors instead of a traditional engine. Hydrogen reacts with oxygen inside the
fuel cells, which produces electricity to power the motors. One primary area
of research is hydrogen storage, to try to increase the range of hydrogen
vehicles while reducing the weight, energy consumption, and complexity of the
storage systems. Two primary methods of storage are metal hydrides and
compression. Some believe that hydrogen cars will never be economically viable
and that the emphasis on this technology is a diversion from the development
and popularization of more efficient hybrid cars and other alternative
technologies.[ _citation needed_ ]

>>

>> A study by The Carbon Trust for the UK Department of Energy and Climate
Change suggests that hydrogen technologies have the potential to deliver UK
transport with near-zero emissions whilst reducing dependence on imported oil
and curtailment of renewable generation. However, the technologies face very
difficult challenges, in terms of cost, performance and policy.[98]

>>

>> Buses, trains, PHB bicycles, canal boats, cargo bikes, golf carts,
motorcycles, wheelchairs, ships, airplanes, submarines, and rockets can
already run on hydrogen, in various forms. NASA used hydrogen to launch Space
Shuttles into space. A working toy model car runs on solar power, using a
regenerative fuel cell to store energy in the form of hydrogen and oxygen gas.
It can then convert the fuel back into water to release the solar energy.[99]

>>

>> BMW's Clean Energy internal combustion hydrogen car has more power and is
faster than hydrogen fuel cell electric cars. A limited series production of
the 7 Series Saloon was announced as commencing at the end of 2006. A BMW
hydrogen prototype (H2R) using the driveline of this model broke the speed
record for hydrogen cars at 300 km/h (186 mi/h), making automotive history.
Mazda has developed Wankel engines to burn hydrogen. The Wankel uses a rotary
principle of operation, so the hydrogen burns in a different part of the
engine from the intake. This reduces pre-detonation, a problem with hydrogen
fueled piston engines.[ _citation needed_ ]

>>

>> The other major car companies like Daimler, Chrysler, Honda, Toyota, Ford
and General Motors, are investing in hydrogen fuel cells instead. VW, Nissan,
and Hyundai/Kia also have fuel cell vehicle prototypes on the road. In
addition, transit agencies across the globe are running prototype fuel cell
buses. Fuel cell vehicles, such as the new Honda Clarity, can get up to 70
miles (110 km) on a kilogram of hydrogen.[ _citation needed_ ]

>>

>> The Hyundai ix35 FCEV fuel cell vehicle is available for lease in the
U.S.[100] In 2014, a total of 54 units were leased.[101] Sales of the Toyota
Mirai to government and corporate customers began in Japan on December 15,
2014.[102] Toyota delivered the first market placed Mirai to the Prime
Minister's Official Residence and announced it got 1,500 orders in Japan in
one month after sales began against a sales target of 400 for 12
months.[94][103]

>>

>> Deliveries to retail customers began in California in October 2015. A total
of 57 units were delivered between October and November 2015.[104] Toyota
scheduled to release the Mirai in the Northeastern States in the first half of
2016. The market launch in Europe is slated for September 2015.[105]

>>

>> ### Liquid nitrogen car[edit]

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-

new.svg/50px-Question_book-new.svg.png)

>>

>> |

>>

>> This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
>  _Find sources:_ "Alternative fuel vehicle" – news **·** newspapers **·**
books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( September 2008)_ _(Learn how and when to
remove this template message)_

>>

>> ---|---

>>

>> Main article: Liquid nitrogen vehicle

>>

>> Further information: Liquid nitrogen economy

>>

>> Liquid nitrogen (LN2) is a method of storing energy. Energy is used to
liquefy air, and then LN2 is produced by evaporation, and distributed. LN2 is
exposed to ambient heat in the car and the resulting nitrogen gas can be used
to power a piston or turbine engine. The maximum amount of energy that can be
extracted from LN2 is 213 Watt-hours per kg (W·h/kg) or 173 W·h per liter, in
which a maximum of 70 W·h/kg can be utilized with an isothermal expansion
process. Such a vehicle with a 350-liter (93 gallon) tank can achieve ranges
similar to a gasoline powered vehicle with a 50-liter (13 gallon) tank.
Theoretical future engines, using cascading topping cycles, can improve this
to around 110 W·h/kg with a quasi-isothermal expansion process. The advantages
are zero harmful emissions and superior energy densities compared to a
Compressed-air vehicle as well as being able to refill the tank in a matter of
minutes.

>>

>> ### Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)[edit]

>>

>> Main article: Natural gas vehicle

>>

>> Liquefied natural gas is natural gas that has been cooled to a point at
which it becomes a cryogenic liquid. In this liquid state, natural gas is more
than 2 times as dense as highly compressed CNG. LNG fuel systems function on
any vehicle capable of burning natural gas. Unlike CNG, which is stored at
high pressure (typically 3000 or 3600 psi) and then regulated to a lower
pressure that the engine can accept, LNG is stored at low pressure (50 to 150
psi) and simply vaporized by a heat exchanger before entering the fuel
metering devices to the engine. Because of its high energy density compared to
CNG, it is very suitable for those interested in long ranges while running on
natural gas.

>>

>> In the United States, the LNG supply chain is the main thing that has held
back this fuel source from growing rapidly. The LNG supply chain is very
analogous to that of diesel or gasoline. First, pipeline natural gas is
liquefied in large quantities, which is analogous to refining gasoline or
diesel. Then, the LNG is transported via semi trailer to fuel stations where
it is stored in bulk tanks until it is dispensed into a vehicle. CNG, on the
other hand, requires expensive compression at each station to fill the high-
pressure cylinder cascades.

>>

>> ### Autogas (LPG)[edit]

>>

>> Main article: Autogas

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ee/Propane_powered_blue_bird_vision.jpg/220px-

Propane_powered_blue_bird_vision.jpg)

>>

>> A propane-fueled school bus in the United States.

>>

>> LPG or liquefied petroleum gas is a low pressure liquefied gas mixture
composed mainly of propane and butane which burns in conventional gasoline
combustion engines with less CO2 than gasoline. Gasoline cars can be
retrofitted to LPG aka Autogas and become bifuel vehicles as the gasoline tank
stays. You can switch between LPG and gasoline during operation. Estimated 10
million vehicles running worldwide.

>>

>> There are 17.473 million LPG powered vehicles worldwide as of December
2010, and the leading countries are Turkey (2.394 million vehicles), Poland
(2.325 million), and South Korea (2.3 million).[15] In the U.S., 190,000 on-
road vehicles use propane,[106] and 450,000 forklifts use it for power.
Whereas it is banned in Pakistan(DEC 2013) as it is considered a risk to
public safety by OGRA.

>>

>> Hyundai Motor Company began sales of the Elantra LPI Hybrid in the South
Korean domestic market in July 2009. The Elantra LPI (Liquefied Petroleum
Injected) is the world's first hybrid electric vehicle to be powered by an
internal combustion engine built to run on liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) as a
fuel.[107][108]

>>

>> ### Steam[edit]

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e0/Cars-

stanleysteamcar-amoswolfe.jpg/200px-Cars-stanleysteamcar-amoswolfe.jpg)

>>

>> The Stanley Steam Car

>>

>> Main article: Steam car

>>

>> A steam car is a car that has a steam engine. Wood, coal, ethanol, or
others can be used as fuel. The fuel is burned in a boiler and the heat
converts water into steam. When the water turns to steam, it expands. The
expansion creates pressure. The pressure pushes the pistons back and forth.
This turns the driveshaft to spin the wheels forward. It works like a coal-
fueled steam train, or steam boat. The steam car was the next logical step in
independent transport.

>>

>> Steam cars take a long time to start, but some can reach speeds over 100
mph (161 km/h) eventually. The late model Doble Steam Cars could be brought to
operational condition in less than 30 seconds, had high top speeds and fast
acceleration, but were expensive to buy.

>>

>> A steam engine uses external combustion, as opposed to internal combustion.
Gasoline-powered cars are more efficient at about 25–28% efficiency. In
theory, a combined cycle steam engine in which the burning material is first
used to drive a gas turbine can produce 50% to 60% efficiency. However,
practical examples of steam engined cars work at only around 5–8% efficiency.

>>

>> The best known and best selling steam-powered car was the Stanley Steamer.
It used a compact fire-tube boiler under the hood to power a simple two-piston
engine which was connected directly to the rear axle. Before Henry Ford
introduced monthly payment financing with great success, cars were typically
purchased outright. This is why the Stanley was kept simple; to keep the
purchase price affordable.

>>

>> Steam produced in refrigeration also can be use by a turbine in other
vehicle types to produce electricity, that can be employed in electric motors
or stored in a battery.

>>

>> Steam power can be combined with a standard oil-based engine to create a
hybrid. Water is injected into the cylinder after the fuel is burned, when the
piston is still superheated, often at temperatures of 1500 degrees or more.
The water will instantly be vaporized into steam, taking advantage of the heat
that would otherwise be wasted.

>>

>> ### Wood gas[edit]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Gasogenog.jpg/200px-

Gasogenog.jpg)

>>

>> Vehicle with a gasifier

>>

>> Main article: Wood gas generator

>>

>> Wood gas can be used to power cars with ordinary internal combustion
engines if a wood gasifier is attached. This was quite popular during World
War II in several European and Asian countries because the war prevented easy
and cost- effective access to oil.

>>

>> Herb Hartman of Woodward, Iowa currently drives a wood powered Cadillac. He
claims to have attached the gasifier to the Cadillac for just $700. Hartman
claims, “A full hopper will go about fifty miles depending on how you drive
it,” and he added that splitting the wood was “labor-intensive. That’s the big
drawback.”[109]

>>

>> ## Multiple fuel source[edit]

>>

>> ### Dual Fuel[edit]

>>

>> Dual fuel vehicle is referred as the vehicle using two types of fuel in the
same time (can be gas + liquid, gas + gas, liquid + liquid) with different
fuel tank.

>>

>> Diesel-CNG Dual Fuel is a system using two type of fuel which are diesel
and Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) at the same time. It is because of CNG need a
source of ignition for combustion in diesel engine.[110]

>>

>> ### Flexible fuel[edit]

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/11/Six_full_flex-

fuel_Brazilian_automobiles_09_2008.jpg/200px-Six_full_flex-

fuel_Brazilian_automobiles_09_2008.jpg)

>>

>> Six typical Brazilian full flex-fuel models from several carmakers,
popularly known as "flex" cars, that run on any blend of ethanol and
gasoline(actually between E20-E25 to E100).

>>

>> Main article: Flexible-fuel vehicle

>>

>> See also: Neat ethanol vehicle

>>

>> A flexible-fuel vehicle (FFV) or dual-fuel vehicle (DFF) is an alternative
fuel automobile or light duty truck with a multifuel engine that can use more
than one fuel, usually mixed in the same tank, and the blend is burned in the
combustion chamber together. These vehicles are colloquially called **flex-
fuel** , or **flexifuel** in Europe, or just flex in Brazil. FFVs are
distinguished from bi-fuel vehicles, where two fuels are stored in separate
tanks. The most common commercially available FFV in the world market is the
ethanol flexible-fuel vehicle, with the major markets concentrated in the
United States, Brazil, Sweden, and some other European countries. In addition
to flex-fuel vehicles running with ethanol, in the US and Europe there were
successful test programs with methanol flex-fuel vehicles, known as M85 FFVs,
and more recently there have been also successful tests using p-series fuels
with E85 flex fuel vehicles, but as of June 2008, this fuel is not yet
available to the general public.

>>

>> Ethanol flexible-fuel vehicles have standard gasoline engines that are
capable of running with ethanol and gasoline mixed in the same tank. These
mixtures have "E" numbers which describe the percentage of ethanol in the
mixture, for example, E85 is 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline. (See common ethanol
fuel mixtures for more information.) Though technology exists to allow ethanol
FFVs to run on any mixture up to E100,[54][111] in the U.S. and Europe, flex-
fuel vehicles are optimized to run on E85. This limit is set to avoid cold
starting problems during very cold weather. The alcohol content might be
reduced during the winter, to E70 in the U.S. or to E75 in Sweden. Brazil,
with a warmer climate, developed vehicles that can run on any mix up to E100,
though E20-E25 is the mandatory minimum blend, and no pure gasoline is sold in
the country.

>>

>> About 48 million automobiles, motorcycles and light duty trucks
manufactured and sold worldwide by mid 2015, and concentrated in four
markets,[112] Brazil (29.5 million by mid 2015),[7][8] the United States (17.4
million by the end of 2014),[9] Canada (1.6 million by 2014),[10] and Sweden
(243,100 through December 2014).[11][12][13] The Brazilian flex fuel fleet
includes over 4 million flexible-fuel motorcycles produced since 2009 through
March 2015.[8] In Brazil, 65% of flex-fuel car owners were using ethanol fuel
regularly in 2009,[113] while, the actual number of American FFVs being run on
E85 is much lower; surveys conducted in the U.S. have found that 68% of
American flex-fuel car owners were not aware they owned an E85 flex.[54] This
is thought to be due to a number of factors, including:

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c8/Three_US_E85_flex_fuel_badges_Ford_GM_Chrysler_copy.jpg/250px-

Three_US_E85_flex_fuel_badges_Ford_GM_Chrysler_copy.jpg)

>>

>> Typical labeling used in the US to identify E85 vehicles. Top left: a small
sticker in the back of the fuel filler door. Bottom left: the bright yellow
gas cap used in newer models. E85 Flexfuel badging used in newer models from
Chrysler (top right), Ford (middle right) and GM (bottom right).

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The appearance of flex-fuel and
non-flex-fuel vehicles is

>>  
>>

>> identical;

>>  
>>                 >>                       * There is no price difference
between a pure-gasoline vehicle and

>>  
>>

>> its flex-fuel variant;

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The lack of consumer awareness
of flex-fuel vehicles;

>>  
>>                       * The lack of promotion of flex-fuel vehicles by
American

>>  
>>

>> automakers, who often do not label the cars or market them in the same way
they do to hybrid cars

>>

>> By contrast, automakers selling FFVs in Brazil commonly affix badges
advertising the car as a flex-fuel vehicle. As of 2007, new FFV models sold in
the U.S. were required to feature a yellow gas cap emblazoned with the label
"E85/gasoline", in order to remind drivers of the cars' flex-fuel
capabilities.[114][115] Use of E85 in the U.S. is also affected by the
relatively low number of E85 filling stations in operation across the country,
with just over 1,750 in August 2008,[116] most of which are concentrated in
the Corn Belt states, led by Minnesota with 353 stations, followed by Illinois
with 181, and Wisconsin with 114.[117] By comparison, there are some 120,000
stations providing regular non-ethanol gasoline in the United States
alone.[118]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/84/Chevrolet_Impala_FlexFuel_34_MIA_12_2008_with_logo.jpg/200px-

Chevrolet_Impala_FlexFuel_34_MIA_12_2008_with_logo.jpg)

>>

>> US E85FlexFuel Chevrolet Impala LT 2009.

>>

>> There have been claims that American automakers are motivated to produce
flex-fuel vehicles due to a loophole in the Corporate Average Fuel Economy
(CAFE) requirements, which gives the automaker a "fuel economy credit" for
every flex-fuel vehicle sold, whether or not the vehicle is actually fueled
with E85 in regular use.[71] This loophole allegedly allows the U.S. auto
industry to meet CAFE fuel economy targets not by developing more fuel-
efficient models, but by spending between US$100 and US$200 extra per vehicle
to produce a certain number of flex-fuel models, enabling them to continue
selling less fuel-efficient vehicles such as SUVs, which netted higher profit
margins than smaller, more fuel-efficient cars.[119][120]

>>

>> In the United States, E85 FFVs are equipped with sensor that automatically
detect the fuel mixture, signaling the ECU to tune spark timing and fuel
injection so that fuel will burn cleanly in the vehicle's internal combustion
engine. Originally, the sensors were mounted in the fuel line and exhaust
system; more recent models do away with the fuel line sensor. Another feature
of older flex-fuel cars is a small separate gasoline storage tank that was
used for starting the car on cold days, when the ethanol mixture made ignition
more difficult.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/31/3_Views_Honda_Flex_Titan_CG_150_Mix_Fuel_Injection_06_2009_Itu.jpg/200px-3_Views_Honda_Flex_Titan_CG_150_Mix_Fuel_Injection_06_2009_Itu.jpg)

>>

>> The Honda CG 150 Titan Mix was the first flex-fuel motorcycle launched to
the market in the world.

>>

>> Modern Brazilian flex-fuel technology enables FFVs to run an any blend
between E20-E25 gasohol and E100 ethanol fuel, using a lambda probe to measure
the quality of combustion, which informs the engine control unit as to the
exact composition of the gasoline-alcohol mixture. This technology, developed
by the Brazilian subsidiary of Bosch in 1994, and further improved and
commercially implemented in 2003 by the Italian subsidiary of Magneti Marelli,
is known as "Software Fuel Sensor". The Brazilian subsidiary of Delphi
Automotive Systems developed a similar technology, known as "Multifuel", based
on research conducted at its facility in Piracicaba, São Paulo.[121] This
technology allows the controller to regulate the amount of fuel injected and
spark time, as fuel flow needs to be decreased to avoid detonation due to the
high compression ratio (around 12:1) used by flex-fuel engines.

>>

>> The first flex motorcycle was launched by Honda in March 2009. Produced by
its Brazilian subsidiary Moto Honda da Amazônia, the CG 150 Titan Mix is sold
for around US$2,700.[122][123][124][125] Because the motorcycle does not have
a secondary gas tank for a cold start like the Brazilian flex cars do, the
tank must have at least 20% of gasoline to avoid start up problems at
temperatures below 15 °C (59 °F). The motorcycle’s panel includes a gauge to
warn the driver about the actual ethanol-gasoline mix in the storage
tank.[125][126]

>>

>> ### Hybrids[edit]

>>

>> #### Hybrid electric vehicle[edit]

>>

>> Main articles: Hybrid vehicle and Hybrid electric vehicle

>>

>> A hybrid vehicle uses multiple propulsion systems to provide motive power.
The most common type of hybrid vehicle is the gasoline-electric hybrid
vehicles, which use gasoline (petrol) and electric batteries for the energy
used to power internal-combustion engines (ICEs) and electric motors. These
motors are usually relatively small and would be considered "underpowered" by
themselves, but they can provide a normal driving experience when used in
combination during acceleration and other maneuvers that require greater
power.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/30/2016_Toyota_Prius_%28ZVW50R%29_Hybrid_liftback_%282016-04-02%29_01.jpg/220px-2016_Toyota_Prius_%28ZVW50R%29_Hybrid_liftback_%282016-04-02%29_01.jpg)

>>

>> The Toyota Prius is the world's best-selling hybrid electric vehicle, with
global sales of almost 4 million units through January 2017.[1]

>>

>> The Toyota Prius first went on sale in Japan in 1997 and it is sold
worldwide since 2000. By 2017 the Prius is sold in more than 90 countries and
regions, with Japan and the United States as its largest markets.[1][127] In
May 2008, global cumulative Prius sales reached the 1 million units, and by
September 2010, the Prius reached worldwide cumulative sales of 2 million
units,[127] and 3 million units by June 2013.[128] As of January 2017[update],
global hybrid sales are led by the Prius family, with cumulative sales of
6.0361 million units, excluding its plug-in hybrid variant.[1] The Toyota
Prius liftback is the leading model of the Toyota brand with cumulative sales
of 3.985 million units, followed by the Toyota Aqua/Prius c, with global sales
of 1.380 million units, the Prius v/α/+ with 671,200, the Camry Hybrid with
614,700 units, the Toyota Auris with 378,000 units, and the Toyota Yaris
Hybrid with 302,700.[1] The best-selling Lexus model is the Lexus RX 400h/RX
450h with global sales of 363,000 units.

>>

>> The Honda Insight is a two-seater hatchback hybrid automobile manufactured
by Honda. It was the first mass-produced hybrid automobile sold in the United
States, introduced in 1999, and produced until 2006.[129][130] Honda
introduced the second-generation Insight in Japan in February 2009, and the
new Insight went on sale in the United States on April 22, 2009.[131][132]
Honda also offers the Honda Civic Hybrid since 2002.

>>

>> As of January 2017[update], there are over 50 models of hybrid electric
cars available in several world markets, with more than 12 million hybrid
electric vehicles sold worldwide since their inception in 1997.[1][16] As of
April 2016[update], Japan ranked as the market leader with more than 5 million
hybrids sold, followed by the United States with cumulative sales of over 4
million units since 1999, and Europe with about 1.5 million hybrids delivered
since 2000.[16] Japan has the world's highest hybrid market penetration. By
2013 the hybrid market share accounted for more than 30% of new standard
passenger car sold, and about 20% new passenger vehicle sales including kei
cars.[133] The Netherlands ranks second with a hybrid market share of 4.5% of
new car sales in 2012.[134]

>>

>> As of January 2017[update], global sales are by Toyota Motor Company with
more than 10 million Lexus and Toyota hybrids sold,[1] followed by Honda Motor
Co., Ltd. with cumulative global sales of more than 1.35 million hybrids as of
June 2014[update];[17][18][19] Ford Motor Corporation with over 424 thousand
hybrids sold in the United States through June 2015, of which, around 10% are
plug-in hybrids;[135][136][137][138][139] Hyundai Group with cumulative global
sales of 200 thousand hybrids as of March 2014[update], including both Hyundai
Motors and Kia Motors hybrid models;[140] and PSA Peugeot Citroën with over
50,000 diesel-powered hybrids sold in Europe through December 2013.[141]

>>

>> The Elantra LPI Hybrid, launched in the South Korean domestic market in
July 2009, is a hybrid vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine built
to run on liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) as a fuel. The Elantra PLI is a mild
hybrid and the first hybrid to adopt advanced lithium polymer (Li–Poly)
batteries.[107][108]

>>

>> #### Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle[edit]

>>

>> Main article: Plug-in hybrid

>>

>> Until 2010 most plug-in hybrids on the road in the U.S. were conversions of
conventional hybrid electric vehicles,[142] and the most prominent PHEVs were
conversions of 2004 or later Toyota Prius, which have had plug-in charging and
more batteries added and their electric-only range extended.[143] Chinese
battery manufacturer and automaker BYD Auto released the F3DM to the Chinese
fleet market in December 2008[144][145][146] and began sales to the general
public in Shenzhen in March 2010.[147][148] General Motors began deliveries of
the Chevrolet Volt in the U.S. in December 2010.[149] Deliveries to retail
customers of the Fisker Karma began in the U.S. in November 2011.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/74/Chevrolet_Volt_WAS_2017_1739.jpg/220px-

Chevrolet_Volt_WAS_2017_1739.jpg)

>>

>> The Chevrolet Volt/Opel Ampera family is the world's top selling plug-in
hybrid. Global sales passed the 100,000 unit milestone in October 2015.[150]

>>

>> During 2012, the Toyota Prius Plug-in Hybrid, Ford C-Max Energi, and Volvo
V60 Plug-in Hybrid were released. The following models were launched during
2013 and 2015: Honda Accord Plug-in Hybrid, Mitsubishi Outlander P-HEV, Ford
Fusion Energi, McLaren P1 (limited edition), Porsche Panamera S E-Hybrid, BYD
Qin, Cadillac ELR, BMW i3 REx, BMW i8, Porsche 918 Spyder (limited
production), Volkswagen XL1 (limited production), Audi A3 Sportback e-tron,
Volkswagen Golf GTE, Mercedes-Benz S 500 e, Porsche Cayenne S E-Hybrid,
Mercedes-Benz C 350 e, BYD Tang, Volkswagen Passat GTE, Volvo XC90 T8, BMW X5
xDrive40e, Hyundai Sonata PHEV, and Volvo S60L PHEV.

>>

>> As of December 2015[update], about 500,000 highway-capable plug-in hybrid
electric cars had been sold worldwide since December 2008, out of total
cumulative global sales of 1.2 million light-duty plug-in electric
vehicles.[151] As of December 2016[update], the Volt/Ampera family of plug-in
hybrids, with combined sales of about 134,500 units is the top selling plug-in
hybrid in the world. Ranking next are the Mitsubishi Outlander P-HEV with
about 119,500, and the Toyota Prius Plug-in Hybrid with almost 78,000.[2]

>>

>> #### Pedal-assisted electric hybrid vehicle[edit]

>>

>> In very small vehicles, the power demand decreases, so human power can be
employed to make a significant improvement in battery life. Two such
commercially made vehicles are the Sinclair C5 and TWIKE.

>>

>> ## Comparative assessment of fossil and alternative fuels[edit]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b0/Well_to_Wheels_%28kWh%29.svg/450px-

Well_to_Wheels_%28kWh%29.svg.png)

>>

>> Different fuel pathways require different amounts of energy to drive 100
km. From left to right: Coal to electricity to electrical car. Renewable
energy (e.g. wind or photovoltaics) to electrical car. Renewable energy to
hydrogen to hydrogen-powered car. Petroleum to diesel to internal combustion
engine.

>>

>> According to a recent comparative energy and environmental analysis of the
vehicle fuel end use (petroleum and natural gas derivatives & hydrogen;
biofuels like ethanol or biodiesel, and their mixtures; as well as electricity
intended to be used in plug-in electric vehicles), the renewable and non-
renewable unit energy costs and CO2 emission cost are suitable indicators for
assessing the renewable energy consumption intensity and the environmental
impact, and for quantifying the thermodynamic performance of the
transportation sector. This analysis allows ranking the energy conversion
processes along the vehicle fuels production routes and their end-use, so that
the best options for the transportation sector can be determined and better
energy policies may be issued. Thus, if a drastic CO2 emissions abatement of
the transportation sector is pursued, a more intensive utilization of ethanol
in the Brazilian transportation sector mix is advisable. However, as the
overall exergy conversion efficiency of the sugar cane industry is still very
low, which increases the unit energy cost of ethanol, better production and
end-use technologies are required. Nonetheless, with the current scenario of a
predominantly renewable Brazilian electricity mix, based on more than 80% of
renewable sources, this source consolidates as the most promising energy
source to reduce the large amount of greenhouse gas emissions which
transportation sector is responsible for.[152]

>>

>> ## See also[edit]

>>  
>>                 >>                       *

>>  
>>

>>
![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/14/Crystal_energy.svg/29px-

Crystal_energy.svg.png)Energy portal

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Alternative Fuels Training
Consortium

>>  
>>                       * Alternatives to the automobile

>>  
>>                       * Butanol fuel

>>  
>>                       * Clean Cities

>>  
>>                       * Engine control unit altering to optimize running on
different

>>  
>>

>> fuels

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Green vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Hydrogen vehicle

>>  
>>                       * List of hybrid vehicles

>>  
>>                       * Solar-charged vehicle

>>  
>>                       * The Hype about Hydrogen

>>  
>>                       * Water-fuelled car

>>  
>>                       * Jack Talbert (Vaporization)

>>  
>>

>> ## References[edit]

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_

>>  
>>

>> _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ "Worldwide Sales of Toyota Hybrids Surpass
10 Million Units" (Press release). Toyota City, Japan: Toyota. 2017-01-14.
Retrieved 2017-01-15. "This latest milestone of 10 million units was achieved
just nine months after total sales reached 9 million units at the end of April
2016."

>>  
>>                 >>                       2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ Cobb, Jeff (2017-01-31).

>>  
>>

>> "Tesla Model S Is World's Best-Selling Plug-in Car For Second Year In A
Row". _HybridCars.com_. Retrieved 2017-01-31. _See also detailed 2016 sales
and cumulative global sales in the two graphs._

>>  
>>                 >>                       3. **^** "Revealed - how the
hybrid car "works" | Claverton

>>  
>>

>> Group". Claverton-energy.com. 2009-02-24. Retrieved 2010-12-12.

>>  
>>                 >>                       4. **^** _Strategies for Managing
Impacts from Automobiles_, US

>>  
>>

>> EPA Region 10 , retrieved May 22, 2012

>>  
>>                 >>                       5. **^** "European Union's End-of-
life Vehicle (ELV) Directive",

>>  
>>

>> _End of Life Vehicles_ , EU, retrieved May 22, 2012

>>  
>>                 >>                       6. **^** Cobb, Jeff (2017-01-16).
"The World Just Bought Its Two-

>>  
>>

>> Millionth Plug-in Car". _HybridCars.com_. Retrieved 2017-01-17.

>>  
>>                 >>                       7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
Giovanna Riato (2015-07-07). "Motores

>>  
>>

>> flex precisam de mais eficiência" [Flex engines require more efficiency]
(in Portuguese). Automotive Business. Retrieved 2015-08-26.

>>  
>>                 >>                       8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ Staff (2015-03-09). "Honda

>>  
>>

>> chega a 4 milhões de Motos Flex Produzidas no Brasil" [Honda reaches 4
million flexible-fuel motorcycles produced in Brazil] (in Portuguese). Revista
Auto Esporte. Retrieved 2015-08-26.

>>  
>>                 >>                       9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Brian Milne
(2014-12-07). "Chicago Ethanol

>>  
>>

>> Stubbornly Holding Premium to Gasoline". Schneider Electric. Retrieved
2015-08-26.

>>  
>>                 >>                       10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Flavelle,
Dana (2015-06-19). "Why hybrid car

>>  
>>

>> sales are stalling". _Toronto Star_. Retrieved 2016-06-14.

>>  
>>                 >>                       11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ BAFF.
"Bought ethanol cars". BioAlcohol Fuel

>>  
>>

>> Foundation. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved
2013-11-17. _As of September 2013, see Graph "Bought flexifuel vehicles"_

>>  
>>                 >>                       12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bil Sweden.
"Definitiva nyregistreringar

>>  
>>

>> 2012" [Final registrations in 2012] (in Swedish). Bil Sweden. Retrieved
2015-08-26. _Download file "Definitiva nyregistreringar 2012" see table:
"Nyregistrerade miljöbilar per typ december 2012" with summary of E85
passenger car registrations for 2012 and 2011_

>>  
>>                 >>                       13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bil Sweden
(2015-01-02). "Nyregistreringar

>>  
>>

>> december 2014 (prel)" [New registrations in December 2014 (preliminar)] (in
Swedish). Bil Sweden. Retrieved 2015-08-26. _Download file "Nyregistreringar
december 2014 (prel)" see table: "Nyregistrerade miljöbilar per typ december
2014" with summary of E85 passenger car registrations for 2014 and 2013_

>>  
>>                 >>                       14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Worldwide
NGV Statistics". NGV Journal.

>>  
>>

>> Retrieved 2013-11-17.

>>  
>>                 >>                       15. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "WLPGA: The
Autogas Market". World LP Gas

>>  
>>

>> Association. Archived from the original on 2013-04-19. Retrieved
2012-02-23. See table: Largest autogas markets, 2010

>>  
>>                 >>                       16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ Cobb, Jeff (2016-06-06).

>>  
>>

>> "Americans Buy Their Four-Millionth Hybrid Car". _HybridCars.com_.
Retrieved 2016-06-12.

>>  
>>                 >>                       17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Honda Press
Release (2012-10-15).

>>  
>>

>> "Cumulative worldwide sales of Honda hybrids passes 1 million units". Green
Car Congress. Retrieved 2012-10-16.

>>  
>>                 >>                       18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Roger
Schreffler (2014-07-14). "Toyota

>>  
>>

>> Strengthens Grip on Japan EV, Hybrid Market". _Ward's AutoWorld_. Archived
from the original on 2014-05-02. Retrieved 2014-04-30. _Honda sold 187,851
hybrids in 2013_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Roger
Schreffler (2014-08-20). "Toyota

>>  
>>

>> Remains Unchallenged Global Hybrid Leader". _Ward's AutoWorld_. Archived
from the original on 2014-10-09. Retrieved 2014-10-04. _Honda sold 158,696
hybrids during the first six months of 2014_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Anúario da
Industria Automobilistica

>>  
>>

>> Brasileira 2011: Tabela 2.3 Produção por combustível - 1957/2010" (in
Portuguese). ANFAVEA - Associação Nacional dos Fabricantes de Veículos
Automotores (Brasil). Retrieved 2012-01-22. pp. 62–63.

>>  
>>                 >>                       21. **^** Alfred Szwarc.
"Abstract: Use of Bio-fuels in Brazil"

>>  
>>

>> (PDF). United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Archived
(PDF) from the original on 11 November 2009. Retrieved 2009-10-24.

>>  
>>                 >>                       22. **^** Luiz A. Horta Nogueira
(2004-03-22). "Perspectivas de un

>>  
>>

>> Programa de Biocombustibles en América Central: Proyecto Uso Sustentable de
Hidrocarburos" (PDF) (in Spanish). Comisión Económica para América Latina y el
Caribe (CEPAL). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2008. Retrieved
2008-05-09.

>>  
>>                 >>                       23. **^** UNICA, Brazil (October
2012). "Frota brasileira de

>>  
>>

>> autoveículos leves (ciclo Otto)" [Brazilian fleet of light vehicles (Otto
cycle)] (in Portuguese). UNICA Data. Retrieved 2012-10-31.

>>  
>>                 >>                       24. **^** Posawatz, Tony
(2018-10-01). "Victory In The Electric

>>  
>>

>> Car Market Will Go To Whoever Creates A Smartphone-Like Ecosystem".
_Forbes_. Retrieved 2018-10-24.

>>  
>>                 >>                       25. **^** Shahan, Zachary
(2016-11-22). "1 Million Pure EVs

>>  
>>

>> Worldwide: EV Revolution Begins!". Clean Technica. Retrieved 2016-11-23.

>>  
>>                 >>                       26. **^** "Nissan strengthens
Formula E partnership with stake in

>>  
>>

>> e.dams" (Press release). Yokohama: Nissan. 2018-09-12. Retrieved
2018-10-24.

>>  
>>                 >>                       27. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Automotive
News China (2018-10-19). "China's

>>  
>>

>> electrified vehicle fleet tops 2.21 million". Automotive News China.
Retrieved 2018-10-24. "China’s fleet of electric vehicles and plug-in hybrids
topped 2.21 million by the end of September as sales of electrified vehicles
continued to surge in the country. Of the total, EVs accounted for 1.78
million, or nearly 81 percent. The rest were plug-in hybrids, China’s Ministry
of Public Security said this week. Electrified cargo vehicles -- which include
trucks, pickups and delivery vans -- approached 254,000, representing 11
percent of the electrified vehicle fleet as of last month."

>>  
>>                 >>                       28. **^** Kane, Mark (2018-10-06).
"Plug-In Electric Cars Sales In

>>  
>>

>> U.S. Surpass 1 Million". InsideEVs.com. Retrieved 2018-10-23.

>>  
>>                 >>                       29. **^** "Electric cars exceed 1m
in Europe as sales soar by more

>>  
>>

>> than 40%". _The Guardian_. 2018-08-26. Retrieved 2018-10-23.

>>  
>>                 >>                       30. **^** Norsk Elbilforening
(Norwegian Electric Vehicle

>>  
>>

>> Association) (October 2018). "Norwegian EV market". Norsk Elbilforening.
Retrieved 2018-10-24. _Place the pointing device over the graph to show the
cumulative number of electric vehicles and plug-in hybrids in Norway at the
end of each year. As of 30 September 2018[update], the registered light-duty
plug-in electric stock totaled 273,559 units, consisting of 183,637 battery
electric vehicles and 89,922 plug-in hybrids._

>>  
>>                 >>                       31. **^** International Energy
Agency (IEA), Clean Energy

>>  
>>

>> Ministerial, and Electric Vehicles Initiative (EVI) (May 2016). "Global EV
Outlook 2016: Beyond one million electric cars" (PDF). IEA Publications.
Retrieved 2016-08-31.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) _See pp.
4–5, and 24–25 and Statistical annex, pp. 34–37_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       32. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
Cobb, Jeff (2017-01-09). "Nissan's

>>  
>>

>> Quarter-Millionth Leaf Means It's The Best-Selling Plug-in Car In History".
_HybridCars.com_. Retrieved 2017-01-10. _As of December 2016[update], the
Nissan Leaf is the world's best-selling plug-in car in history with more than
250,000 units delivered, followed by the Tesla Model S with over 158,000 sales
(which may soon replace the Nissan Leaf in most EV sales), the Volt/Ampera
family of vehicles with 134,500 vehicles sold, and the Mitsubishi Outlander
PHEV with about 116,500 units sold through November 2016. These are the only
plug-in electric cars so far with over 100,000 global sales._

>>  
>>                 >>                       33. **^** "Plug-in Vehicle
Tracker: What's Coming, When". Plug In

>>  
>>

>> America. Retrieved 2012-01-15.

>>  
>>                 >>                       34. **^** Groupe Renault (January
2017). "Ventes Mensuelles"

>>  
>>

>> [Monthly Sales] (in French). Renault.com. Retrieved 2017-01-18. _Includes
passenger and light utility variants. Click on "(décembre 2016)" to download
the file "XLSX - 239 Ko" for CYTD sales in 2016, and open the tab "Sales by
Model". Click on "+ Voir plus" (See more) to download the files "Ventes
mensuelles du groupe (décembre 2011) (xls, 183 Ko)" "Ventes mensuelles
(décembre 2012) (xls, 289 Ko)" - Ventes mensuelles (décembre 2013) (xlsx, 227
Ko)" - "XLSX - 220 Ko Ventes mensuelles (décembre 2014)" - "Ventes mensuelles
(décembre 2015)" to download the file "XLSX - 227 Ko" for 2011, 2012, 2013,
2014 and 2015 sales. Sales figures for 2013 were revised in the 2014 report_

>>  
>>                 >>                       35. **^** "nycomb.se, Nycomb
Chemicals company". Archived from the

>>  
>>

>> original on 3 June 2008. Retrieved 26 July 2017.

>>  
>>                 >>                       36. **^** "Archived copy".
Archived from the original on

>>  
>>

>> 2007-10-08. Retrieved 2011-11-04.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
topsoe.com

>>  
>>                 >>                       37. **^** Semelsberger, Troy A;
Borup, Rodney L; Greene, Howard L

>>  
>>

>> (2006). "Dimethyl ether (DME) as an alternative fuel". _Journal of Power
Sources_. **156** (2): 497–511. Bibcode:2006JPS...156..497S.
doi:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2005.05.082. ISSN 0378-7753.

>>  
>>                 >>                       38. **^** "Archived copy" (PDF).
Archived from the original (PDF)

>>  
>>

>> on 2009-01-07. Retrieved 2011-11-04.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
(link), _Conference on the Development and Promotion of Environmentally
Friendly Heavy Duty Vehicles such as DME Trucks_ , Washington DC, March 17,
**2006**

>>  
>>                 >>                       39. **^** "BioDME". Retrieved  30
May 2015.

>>  
>>                       40. **^** "Biofuels in the European Union, 2006"
(PDF). Retrieved

>>  
>>

>> 26 July 2017.

>>  
>>                 >>                       41. **^** "Home | Volvo Group".
Archived from the original on

>>  
>>

>> 2009-05-25. Retrieved 2011-11-04.

>>  
>>                 >>                       42. **^** "Volvo Group - Driving
prosperity through transport

>>  
>>

>> solutions". Retrieved 26 July 2017.

>>  
>>                 >>                       43. **^** "Chemrec press release
September 9, 2010" (PDF).

>>  
>>

>> Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 June 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2017.

>>  
>>                 >>                       44. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Ammonia as
a Transportation Fuel IV" (PDF).

>>  
>>

>> Norm Olson – Iowa Energy Center. 15–16 October 2007. Archived from the
original (PDF) on 2012-02-07.

>>  
>>                 >>                       45. **^** "Iowa Energy Center,
Renewable Energy and Energy

>>  
>>

>> Efficiency; Research, Education and Demonstration – Related Renewable
Energy – Ammonia 2007". Archived from the original on 2012-03-18.

>>  
>>                 >>                       46. **^** "Ammonia Motors". 1
October 2007. Retrieved  28 November

>>  
>>

>> 2010.

>>  
>>                 >>                       47. **^** "YouTube – Ammonia
Powered Car". CBC National News Nov.

>>  
>>

>> 6, 2006

>>  
>>                 >>                       48. **^** "Watch 'Ammonia Fuel '".
Greg Vezina. Retrieved 7 July

>>  
>>

>> 2009.

>>  
>>                 >>                       49. **^** "Watch 'Hydrofuel Inc.
Update' and 'Hydrofuel NH3 Car

>>  
>>

>> Featured on HardDrive '". Hydrofuel Inc.

>>  
>>                 >>                       50. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Green NH3.
"Greennh3.com". Greennh3.com.

>>  
>>

>> Archived from the original on 28 October 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-12.

>>  
>>                 >>                       51. **^** Hunt, V, D, The Gasohol
Handbook, Industrial Press Inc.,

>>  
>>

>> 1981, pp 9, 420,421, 442

>>  
>>                 >>                       52. **^** English, Andrew
(2008-07-25). "Ford Model T reaches

>>  
>>

>> 100". London: The Telegraph. Retrieved 2008-08-11.

>>  
>>                 >>                       53. **^** "Ethanol: Introduction".
Journey to Forever. Archived

>>  
>>

>> from the original on 10 August 2008. Retrieved 2008-08-11.

>>  
>>                 >>                       54. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_

>>  
>>

>> Goettemoeller, Jeffrey; Adrian Goettemoeller (2007). _Sustainable Ethanol:
Biofuels, Biorefineries, Cellulosic Biomass, Flex-Fuel Vehicles, and
Sustainable Farming for Energy Independence_. Prairie Oak Publishing,
Maryville, Missouri. pp. 56–61. ISBN 978-0-9786293-0-4.

>>  
>>                 >>                       55. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ _**e**_ Roberta J Nichols

>>  
>>

>> (2003). "The Methanol Story: A Sustainable Fuel for the Future" (PDF).
Methanol Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-12-11. Retrieved
2008-08-30.

>>  
>>                 >>                       56. **^** "Another Inconvenient
Truth" (PDF). Oxfam. 2008-06-28.

>>  
>>

>> Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2008. Retrieved 2008-08-06.
Oxfam Briefing Paper 114.

>>  
>>                 >>                       57. **^** Searchinger, T.; et al.
(2008-02-29). "Use of U.S.

>>  
>>

>> Croplands for Biofuels Increases Greenhouse Gases Through Emissions from
Land- Use Change". _Science_. **319** (5867): 1238–1240.
Bibcode:2008Sci...319.1238S. doi:10.1126/science.1151861. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID
18258860. Originally published online in Science Express on 7 February 2008.
See Letters to _Science_ by Wang and Haq. There are critics to these findings
for assuming a worst-case scenario.

>>  
>>                 >>                       58. **^** Fargione, J.; Hill, J;
Tilman, D; Polasky, S; Hawthorne,

>>  
>>

>> P; et al. (2008-02-29). "Land Clearing and the Biofuel Carbon Debt".
_Science_. **319** (5867): 1235–1238. Bibcode:2008Sci...319.1235F.
doi:10.1126/science.1152747. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 18258862. Originally
published online in Science Express on 7 February 2008. There are rebuttals to
these findings for assuming a worst-case scenario

>>  
>>                 >>                       59. **^** Ethanol Promotion and
Information Council (2007-02-27).

>>  
>>

>> "When is E85 not 85 percent ethanol? When it's E70 with an E85 sticker on
it". AutoblogGreen. Retrieved 2008-08-19.

>>  
>>                 >>                       60. **^**
http://www.eere.energy.gov Energy.gov site Archived

>>  
>>

>> 2016-01-28 at the Wayback Machine

>>  
>>                 >>                       61. **^** http://www.eia.doe.gov
Alternative Fuel Efficiencies in

>>  
>>

>> Miles per Gallon Archived December 3, 2007, at the Wayback Machine

>>  
>>                 >>                       62. **^** JB Online (2007-11-20).
"Álcool ou Gasolina? Saiba qual

>>  
>>

>> escolher quando for abastecer" (in Portuguese). Opinaoweb. Retrieved
2008-08-24.

>>  
>>                 >>                       63. **^** InfoMoney (2007-05-30).
"Saiba o que fazer para

>>  
>>

>> economizar gasolina" (in Portuguese). IGF. Archived from the original on
2009-02-09. Retrieved 2008-08-24.

>>  
>>                 >>                       64. **^** "EPA Mileage".
Fueleconomy.gov. Archived from the

>>  
>>

>> original on 3 December 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-12.

>>  
>>                 >>                       65. **^** "Reported E85 Prices-
Last 30 days". E85prices.com.

>>  
>>

>> Archived from the original on 12 September 2008. Retrieved 2008-09-18.

>>  
>>                 >>                       66. **^** "Livina, primeiro carro
flex da Nissan chega com preços

>>  
>>

>> entre R$ 46.690 e R$ 56.690" (in Portuguese). Car Magazine Online.
2009-03-18. Retrieved 2009-03-26.[ _permanent dead link_ ]

>>  
>>                 >>                       67. **^** Reuters (2008-08-06).
"Vendas de veículos flex no Brasil

>>  
>>

>> sobem 31,1% em julho 2008" (in Portuguese). Hoje Notícias. Archived from
the original on 2009-02-01. Retrieved 2008-08-13.

>>  
>>                 >>                       68. **^** "Veículos flex somam 6
milhões e alcançam 23% da frota"

>>  
>>

>> (in Portuguese). Folha Online. 2008-08-04. Retrieved 2008-08-12.

>>  
>>                 >>                       69. **^** "DENATRAN Frota por
tipo/UF 2008 (file 2008-03)" (in

>>  
>>

>> Portuguese). Departamento Nacional de Trânsito. Retrieved 2008-05-03.[
_permanent dead link_ ] As of March 31, 2008, DENATRAN reports a total fleet
of 50 million, including motorcycles, trucks and special equipment, and 32
million automobiles and light commercial vehicles.

>>  
>>                 >>                       70. **^** Daniel Budny and Paulo
Sotero, editor (April 2007).

>>  
>>

>> "Brazil Institute Special Report: The Global Dynamics of Biofuels" (PDF).
Brazil Institute of the Woodrow Wilson Center. Archived from the original
(PDF) on 28 May 2008. Retrieved 2008-05-03.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list
(link)

>>  
>>                 >>                       71. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Inslee, Jay;
Bracken Hendricks (2007).

>>  
>>

>> _Apollo's Fire_. Island Press, Washington, D.C. pp. 153–155, 160–161. ISBN
978-1-59726-175-3. _See Chapter 6. Homegrown Energy._

>>  
>>                 >>                       72. **^** Green Car Journal
Editors (1994). "Cars On Alcohol, Part

>>  
>>

>> 9: Corn Based Ethanol in the US". Green Car. Archived from the original on
11 October 2008. Retrieved 2008-08-31.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list
(link)

>>  
>>                 >>                       73. **^** Paul Dever (January
1996). "Alternative Fuel Ford

>>  
>>

>> Taurus". The Auto Channel. Retrieved 2008-08-14. Original source: 1996
North American International Auto Show Press Release

>>  
>>                 >>                       74. **^** Green Car Journal
Editors (1995). "Cars On Alcohol, Part

>>  
>>

>> 13: GM Supports FlexFuel". Green Car. Archived from the original on 13
October 2008. Retrieved 2008-08-31.CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list (link)

>>  
>>                 >>                       75. **^** Maria Grahn (2004). "Why
is ethanol given emphasis over

>>  
>>

>> methanol in Sweden?" (PDF). Chalmers University of Technology. Archived
from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-17. Retrieved 2008-08-31.

>>  
>>                 >>                       76. **^** Engine efficiency

>>  
>>                       77. **^** Norman, Jim. "Where There’s Never an Oil
Shortage". _The

>>  
>>

>> New York Times_. May 13, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       78. **^** Tillman, Adriane.
"Greasestock Festival returns, bigger

>>  
>>

>> and better Archived 2008-05-18 at the Wayback Machine". May 14, 2008.

>>  
>>                 >>                       79. **^** "Greasestock 2008
Archived 2008-05-29 at the Wayback

>>  
>>

>> Machine". _Greasestock Archived 2008-05-29 at the Wayback Machine_.
Retrieved May 20, 2008.

>>  
>>                 >>                       80. **^** Max, Josh. "Gas-guzzlers
become veggie delights at

>>  
>>

>> Greasestock in Yorktown Heights". _Daily News_. May 13, 2008.

>>  
>>                 >>                       81. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Bio-methane
fuelled vehicles - John Baldwin

>>  
>>

>> CNG Services | Claverton Group". Claverton-energy.com. Retrieved
2010-12-12.

>>  
>>                 >>                       82. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Sperling,
Daniel; Deborah Gordon (2009).

>>  
>>

>> _Two billion cars: driving toward sustainability_. Oxford University Press,
New York. pp. 93–94. ISBN 978-0-19-537664-7.

>>  
>>                 >>                       83. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Current
Natural Gas Vehicle Statistics".

>>  
>>

>> International Association for Natural Gas Vehicles. Retrieved 2013-11-17.
_Click on Ranked by number._

>>  
>>                 >>                       84. **^** "Pakistan Hits One-
Million Natural Gas Vehicle Mark".

>>  
>>

>> Green Car Congres. 2006-05-13. Retrieved 2008-10-17.

>>  
>>                 >>                       85. **^** GNVNews (November 2006).
"Montadores Investem nos Carros

>>  
>>

>> á GNV" (in Portuguese). Institutio Brasileiro de Petroleo e Gas. Archived
from the original on 2008-12-11. Retrieved 2008-09-20.

>>  
>>                 >>                       86. **^** Pike Research
(2011-09-14). "Pike Research predicts 68%

>>  
>>

>> jump in global CNG vehicle sales by 2016". AutoblogGreen. Retrieved
2011-09-26. See details in Press Release

>>  
>>                 >>                       87. **^** Christine Lepisto
(2006-08-27). "Fiat Siena Tetra Power:

>>  
>>

>> Your Choice of Four Fuels". Treehugger. Archived from the original on 19
September 2008. Retrieved 2008-08-24.

>>  
>>                 >>                       88. **^** "Nouvelle Fiat Siena
2008: sans complexe" (in French).

>>  
>>

>> Caradisiac. 2007-11-01. Archived from the original on 2008-07-01. Retrieved
2008-08-31.

>>  
>>                 >>                       89. **^** Agência AutoInforme
(2006-06-19). "Siena Tetrafuel vai

>>  
>>

>> custar R$ 41,9 mil" (in Portuguese). WebMotor. Archived from the original
on 2008-12-10. Retrieved 2008-08-14. The article argues that even though Fiat
called it tetra fuel, it actually runs on three fuels: natural gas, ethanol,
and gasoline.

>>  
>>                 >>                       90. **^** TaxiNews. "Gás Natural
Veicular" (in Portuguese).

>>  
>>

>> TDenavagari.com.br. Retrieved 2008-08-24.[ _permanent dead link_ ]

>>  
>>                 >>                       91. **^** "Team FAST - Building
the world's first bus on formic

>>  
>>

>> acid". _Team FAST_. Retrieved 26 July 2017.

>>  
>>                 >>                       92. **^** "Team FAST presents
scale model of car powered by formic

>>  
>>

>> acid". _tue.nl_. Retrieved 26 July 2017.

>>  
>>                 >>                       93. **^** Jeff Cobb (2014-11-17).
"Toyota Mirai To Be Priced From

>>  
>>

>> $57,500". HybridCars.com. Retrieved 2014-11-19.

>>  
>>                 >>                       94. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_
"首相「水素時代の幕開け」…規制緩和を加速へ" [Opening of hydrogen

>>  
>>

>> age, accelerate deregulations]. _Yomiuri Shimbun_ (in Japanese).
2015-01-16. Retrieved 2015-01-16. "Yomiuri Shimbun Ver.13S page 1"

>>  
>>                 >>                       95. **^** Honda Motor Company (16
June 2008). "Honda Announces

>>  
>>

>> First FCX Clarity Customers and World's First Fuel Cell Vehicle Dealership
Network as Clarity Production Begins". Archived from the original on 14 August
2009. Retrieved 2009-06-01.

>>  
>>                 >>                       96. **^** "Hydrogen fuel cells to
hit showrooms by 2013".

>>  
>>

>> _Collision Repair Magazine_. Archived from the original on 7 November 2014.
Retrieved 30 May 2015.

>>  
>>                 >>                       97. **^** John Voelcker
(2014-07-29). "Honda Ends Three Green

>>  
>>

>> Models For 2015: Insight, Fit EV, FCX Clarity". Green Car Reports.
Retrieved 2014-08-20.

>>  
>>                 >>                       98. **^** "Hydrogen for
transport", _The Carbon Trust_ , 28

>>  
>>

>> November 2014. Retrieved on 20 January 2015.

>>  
>>                 >>                       99. **^** Thames & Kosmos kit
Archived July 12, 2012, at the

>>  
>>

>> Wayback Machine, Other educational materials, and many more demonstration
car kits Archived December 26, 2007, at the Wayback Machine.

>>  
>>                 >>                       100. **^** Voelcker, John. "The
New Hyundai ix35", Hyundai,

>>  
>>

>> accessed December 7, 2014

>>  
>>                 >>                       101. **^** "Plug-In Electric Car
Sales Continue Rise In 2014:

>>  
>>

>> 100,000-Plus Last Year", _Green Car Reports_ , January 5, 2015

>>  
>>                 >>                       102. **^** Yoko Kubota
(2014-12-15). "Toyota's Fuel-Cell Car Mirai

>>  
>>

>> Goes on Sale". _Japan Real Time (Wall Street Journall)_. Retrieved
2014-12-29.

>>  
>>                 >>                       103. **^** Mihalascu, Dan
(2015-01-15). "Toyota Gets 1,500 Orders

>>  
>>

>> for the Mirai in Japan in One Month". _Car Scoops_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       104. **^** John Voelcker
(2015-12-14). "Portable Hydrogen Fuelers

>>  
>>

>> Go To Six Toyota Mirai Dealers As Stations Lag". _Green Car Reports_.
Retrieved 2015-12-18.

>>  
>>                 >>                       105. **^** John Voelcker
(2014-11-18). "2016 Toyota Mirai Priced

>>  
>>

>> At $57,500, With $499 Monthly Lease". Green Car Reports. Retrieved
2014-11-19.

>>  
>>                 >>                       106. **^** "Propane FAQ".
Retrieved  2011-04-25.

>>  
>>                       107. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Hyundai Elantra LPi hybrid
official press

>>  
>>

>> release". Hyundai. 2009-07-10. Archived from the original on 2009-07-17.
Retrieved 2010-03-23.

>>  
>>                 >>                       108. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Hyundai
Unveils Elantra LPI HEV at Seoul

>>  
>>

>> Motor Show". Hyundai Global News. 2009-04-02. Retrieved 2010-03-23.[
_permanent dead link_ ]

>>  
>>                 >>                       109. **^**
http://thenewswheel.com/wood-powered-cadillac-cruises-

>>  
>>

>> past-gas-stations/ Timothy Walling-Moore "Wood-Powered Cadillac Cruises
Past Gas Stations " The News Wheel June 12, 2014

>>  
>>                 >>                       110. **^** Mukhsin, Ismail,
Muammar; Hakim, Zulkifli, Abd Fathul;

>>  
>>

>> Fawzi, Mohd Ali, Mas; Azmir, Osman, Shahrul (April 2016). "Conversion
method of a diesel engine to a CNG-diesel dual fuel engine and its financial
savings". _Arpn Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences_. **11**.
Retrieved 2018-08-20.

>>  
>>                 >>                       111. **^** Clean Cities (June
2008). "Flexible Fuel Vehicles:

>>  
>>

>> Providing a Renewable Fuel Choice (Fact Sheet)" (PDF). U.S. Department of
Energy. Retrieved 2008-08-24.

>>  
>>                 >>                       112. **^** Ryan, Lisa; Turton, Hal
(2007). _Sustainable Automobile

>>  
>>

>> Transport_. Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd, England. pp. 40–41. ISBN
978-1-84720-451-6.

>>  
>>                 >>                       113. **^** Wagner Oliveira
(2009-09-30). "Etanol é usado em 65% da

>>  
>>

>> frota flexível" (in Portuguese). Diario do Grande ABC. Retrieved
2009-10-18.[ _permanent dead link_ ]

>>  
>>                 >>                       114. **^** Ken Thomas
(2007-05-07). "'Flex-fuel' vehicles touted".

>>  
>>

>> USA Today. Retrieved 2008-09-15.

>>  
>>                 >>                       115. **^** Christine Gable; Scott
Gable. "Yellow E85 gas cap".

>>  
>>

>> About.com: Hybrid Cars & Alt Fuels. Archived from the original on
2008-10-05. Retrieved 2008-09-18.

>>  
>>                 >>                       116. **^** National Ethanol
Vehicle Coalition (2008-09-08). "New

>>  
>>

>> E85 Stations". NEVC FYI Newsletter (Vol 14 issue 15). Archived from the
original on 15 September 2008. Retrieved 2008-09-15.

>>  
>>                 >>                       117. **^** National Ethanol
Vehicle Coalition (2008-08-08). "New

>>  
>>

>> E85 Stations". NEVC FYI Newsletter (Vol 14 no. 13). Archived from the
original on 2008-10-10. Retrieved 2008-08-19. _For a complete and updated
listing, go to www.e85refueling.com_

>>  
>>                 >>                       118. **^** "2002 Economic Census:
Retail Trade - United States".

>>  
>>

>> Census.gov. Archived from the original on 2010-10-18. Retrieved 2010-12-12.

>>  
>>                 >>                       119. **^** "As buyers shun SUVs,
expect to pay more for that small

>>  
>>

>> car - Cleveland Business News". Blog.cleveland.com. Retrieved 2010-12-12.

>>  
>>                 >>                       120. **^** "Bumpy ride for
biofuels". The Economist. 2008-01-18.

>>  
>>

>> Archived from the original on 27 October 2008. Retrieved 2008-09-14.

>>  
>>                 >>                       121. **^** João Gabriel de Lima
(2006-02-01). "A riqueza é o

>>  
>>

>> saber" (in Portuguese). Revista Veja. Archived from the original on 5
September 2008. Retrieved 2008-08-19. Print edition No. 1941

>>  
>>                 >>                       122. **^** Honda News Release
(2003-03-11). "Honda Begins Sales of

>>  
>>

>> Flex Fuel Motorcycle CG150 TITAN MIX in Brazil". Honda. Archived from the
original on 2009-03-13. Retrieved 2003-03-11.

>>  
>>                 >>                       123. **^** Agencia EFE
(2003-03-11). "Honda lançará moto flex

>>  
>>

>> ainda neste mês no Brasil" (in Portuguese). Folha Online. Retrieved
2003-03-11.

>>  
>>                 >>                       124. **^** "Honda lança no Brasil
primeira moto flex do mundo" (in

>>  
>>

>> Portuguese). UNICA. 2003-03-11. Archived from the original on 2012-06-29.
Retrieved 2003-03-11.

>>  
>>                 >>                       125. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Reese
Ewing; Lisa Shumaker (2009-04-29).

>>  
>>

>> "Motorcycle joins Brazil's biofueled fleet". Reuters. Retrieved 2009-04-30.

>>  
>>                 >>                       126. **^** "Honda lança primeira
moto bicombustível do mundo" (in

>>  
>>

>> Portuguese). G1 Portal de Notícias da Globo. 2008-03-11. Archived from the
original on 2012-02-24. Retrieved 2003-03-11.

>>  
>>                 >>                       127. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Worldwide
Prius Cumulative Sales Top 2M

>>  
>>

>> Mark; Toyota Reportedly Plans Two New Prius Variants for the US By End of
2012". Green Car Congress. 2010-10-07. Archived from the original on 11
October 2010. Retrieved 2010-10-07.

>>  
>>                 >>                       128. **^** Toyota Europe News
(2013-07-03). "Worldwide Prius sales

>>  
>>

>> top 3-million mark; Prius family sales at 3.4 million". Green Car Congress.
Retrieved 2013-07-03.

>>  
>>                 >>                       129. **^** "Honda Insight Concept
Hybrid Vehicle to Debut at Paris

>>  
>>

>> International Auto Show" (PDF). _Honda Corporate Press Release_.
2008-09-14. Retrieved 2009-05-29.[ _dead link_ ]

>>  
>>                 >>                       130. **^** James B. Treece;
Lindsay Chappell (2006-05-17). "Honda

>>  
>>

>> Kills the Insight". _AutoWeek_. Retrieved 2008-01-10.

>>  
>>                 >>                       131. **^** "2017 Honda Accord
Hybrid - Honda". _Honda

>>  
>>

>> Automobiles_. Retrieved 26 July 2017.

>>  
>>                 >>                       132. **^** "Honda Insight:
America's most affordable hybrid at

>>  
>>

>> $19,800". _Honda_. Motor Authority. 10 March 2009. Archived from the
original on 14 March 2009. Retrieved 21 March 2009.

>>  
>>                 >>                       133. **^** Dan Rutherford
(2014-04-04). "Hybrids break through in

>>  
>>

>> the Japan auto market". International Council on Clean Transportation
(ICCT). Retrieved 2015-01-25.

>>  
>>                 >>                       134. **^** International Council
on Clean Transportation (ICCT)

>>  
>>

>> (2013). "European Vehicle Market Statistics - Pocketbook 2013" (PDF). ICCT.
Retrieved 2015-01-24. _See Figure 1.3, pp 6. See also tables in pp. 88–110 for
HEV market by country from 2001 to 2012._

>>  
>>                 >>                       135. **^** Will Nichols
(2012-06-25). "Ford tips hybrids to

>>  
>>

>> overshadow electric cars". Business Green. Retrieved 2012-10-16. _By June
2012 Ford had sold 200,000 full hybrids in the US since 2004._

>>  
>>                 >>                       136. **^** Jeff Cobb (2013-04-22).
"December 2012 Dashboard".

>>  
>>

>> HybridCars.com and Baum & Associates. Retrieved 2013-09-08. _See the
section: December 2012 Hybrid Cars Numbers. A total of 434,498 hybrid electric
vehicles were sold during 2012. Ford sold 32,543 hybrids in the U.S. during
2012, including 14,100 Ford Fusion Hybrids, 10,935 C-Max Hybrids, 6,067
Lincoln MKZ Hybrids, and 1,441 Ford Escape Hybrids._

>>  
>>                 >>                       137. **^** Jeff Cobb (2014-01-06).
"December 2013 Dashboard".

>>  
>>

>> HybridCars.com and Baum & Associates. Retrieved 2014-01-11.

>>  
>>                 >>                       138. **^** Jeff Cobb (2015-01-06).
"December 2014 Dashboard".

>>  
>>

>> _HybridCars.com and Baum & Associates_. Retrieved 2015-01-21.

>>  
>>                 >>                       139. **^** Jeff Cobb (2015-07-02).
"June 2015 Dashboard".

>>  
>>

>> _HybridCars.com and Baum & Associates_. Retrieved 2015-08-22.

>>  
>>                 >>                       140. **^** IHS Inc. (2014-05-16).
"News - Hyundai-Kia reports

>>  
>>

>> cumulative global hybrid sales of 200,000 units". IHS Technology. Retrieved
2014-10-04.

>>  
>>                 >>                       141. **^** "50,000 Diesel Hybrid
Vehicles Sold in Europe by PSA

>>  
>>

>> Peugeot Citroën". _Reuters_. 2014-01-10. Retrieved 2014-10-04.

>>  
>>                 >>                       142. **^** Sherry Boschert (2006).
_Plug-in Hybrids: The Cars that

>>  
>>

>> will Recharge America_. New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, Canada.
ISBN 978-0-86571-571-4.

>>  
>>                 >>                       143. **^** Bichlien Hoang. "Plug-
In Hybrid Electric Vehicles

>>  
>>

>> (PHEVs): Overview". Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
Retrieved 2010-03-05.

>>  
>>                 >>                       144. **^** Crippen, A. (December
15, 2008) "Warren Buffett's

>>  
>>

>> Electric Car Hits the Chinese Market, But Rollout Delayed For U.S. &
Europe" _CNBC_. Retrieved December 2008.

>>  
>>                 >>                       145. **^** Balfour, F. (December
15, 2008)"China's First Plug-In

>>  
>>

>> Hybrid Car Rolls Out" _Business Week_. Retrieved December 2008.

>>  
>>                 >>                       146. **^** "BYD F3DM Plug-in
Hybrid Goes On Sale in China". Green

>>  
>>

>> Car Congress. 2008-12-15. Retrieved 2009-02-28.

>>  
>>                 >>                       147. **^** "BYD Auto To Begin
Sales of F3DM Plug-in to

>>  
>>

>> Individuals". Green Car Congress. 2010-03-23. Retrieved 2010-03-27.

>>  
>>                 >>                       148. **^** "BYD Auto to Offer F3DM
Plug-in Hybrid to Chinese

>>  
>>

>> Individuals Starting Next Week". Edmunds.com. 2010-03-23. Archived from the
original on 2010-03-30. Retrieved 2010-03-27.

>>  
>>                 >>                       149. **^** "First Chevy Volts
Reach Customers, Will Out-Deliver

>>  
>>

>> Nissan in December". plugincars.com. 2010-12-16. Retrieved 2010-12-17.

>>  
>>                 >>                       150. **^** Jeff Cobb (2015-11-04).
"GM Sells Its 100,000th Volt in

>>  
>>

>> October". _HybridCars.com_. Archived from the original on 2015-11-08.
Retrieved 2015-11-04. _About 102,000 units of the Volt/Ampera family have been
sold worldwide by the end of October 2015_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       151. **^** Cobb, Jeff
(2016-01-18). "Top Six Plug-in Vehicle

>>  
>>

>> Adopting Countries – 2015". _HybridCars.com_. Retrieved 2016-02-12. _About
520,000 highway legal light-duty plug-in electric vehicles were sold worldwide
in 2015, with cumulative global sales reaching 1,235,000.Plug-in hybrids
represent about 40% of global plug-in electric vehicle sales._

>>  
>>                 >>                       152. **^** Flórez-Orrego, Daniel;
Silva, Julio A.M.; Oliveira Jr.,

>>  
>>

>> Silvio de (2015). "Exergy and environmental comparison of the end use of
vehicle fuels: The Brazilian case". _Energy Conversion and Management_.
**100** : 220–231. doi:10.1016/j.enconman.2015.04.074. ISSN 0196-8904.

>>

>> ## External links[edit]

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Cradle-to-Grave Lifecycle
Analysis of U.S. Light-Duty Vehicle-

>>  
>>

>> Fuel Pathways: A Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Economic Assessment of
Current (2015) and Future (2025–2030) Technologies (includes estimated cost of
avoided GHG emissions from different AFV technologies), Argonne National
Laboratory, June 2016.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Clean Cities - 2014 Vehicle
Buyer's Guide, National Renewable

>>  
>>

>> Energy Laboratory (NREL), U.S. Department of Energy, Clean Cities program.
December 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * EERE:

>>  
>>                       * Alternative Fuels for Automobiles - Infographic

>>  
>>                         * Alternative Fuel Price Report.

>>  
>>                         * U.S. Alternative Fueling Stations.

>>  
>>                       * Green Car Guide

>>  
>>                       * Popular Mechanics describes the pros and cons of
various

>>  
>>

>> alternative fuels and what the future looks like for each.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Powering Ahead - The future of
low-carbon cars and fuels, the

>>  
>>

>> RAC Foundation and UK Petroleum Industry Association, April 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Questions and Answers about
Trev., UniSA, Division of

>>  
>>

>> Information Technology, Engineering and the Environment.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Sustainable Green Fleets EU-
sponsored Dissemination project for

>>  
>>

>> alternative propelled cars and alternative fuels

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Transitions to Alternative
Vehicles and Fuels, National Academy

>>  
>>

>> of Sciences (2013), ISBN 978-0-309-26852-3

>>  
>>                 >>                       * v

>>  
>>                       * t

>>  
>>                       * e

>>  
>>

>> Alternative fuel vehicles

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Compressed-air engine|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Compressed air car

>>  
>>                       * Compressed-air vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Tesla turbine

>>  
>>

>> |

>>

>> ![Elektroauto

1.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/27/Elektroauto_1.jpg/250px-

Elektroauto_1.jpg)

>>

>> Electric motor|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Battery-electric locomotive

>>  
>>                       * Battery electric vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Cater MetroTrolley

>>  
>>                       * Electric aircraft

>>  
>>                       * Electric bicycle

>>  
>>                       * Pedelec

>>  
>>                       * Electric boat

>>  
>>                       * Electric bus

>>  
>>                         * Battery electric bus

>>  
>>                       * Electric car

>>  
>>                         * List

>>  
>>                       * Electric truck

>>  
>>                       * Electric platform truck

>>  
>>                       * Electric vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Electric motorcycles and scooters

>>  
>>                       * Electric kick scooter

>>  
>>                       * Gyro flywheel locomotive

>>  
>>                       * Hybrid electric vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Hybrid train

>>  
>>                       * Motorized bicycle

>>  
>>                       * Neighborhood Electric Vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Plug-in electric vehicle

>>  
>>                         * List

>>  
>>                       * Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Solar vehicle

>>  
>>                         * Solar car

>>  
>>                         * Solar bus

>>  
>>

>> Biofuel ICE|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Alcohol fuel

>>  
>>                       * Biodiesel

>>  
>>                       * Biogas

>>  
>>                       * Butanol fuel

>>  
>>                       * Common ethanol fuel mixtures

>>  
>>                       * E85

>>  
>>                       * Ethanol fuel

>>  
>>                       * Flexible-fuel vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Methanol economy

>>  
>>                       * Methanol fuel

>>  
>>                       * Wood gas

>>  
>>

>> Hydrogen|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Fuel cell vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Hydrogen economy

>>  
>>                       * Hydrogen vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Hydrogen internal combustion engine vehicle

>>  
>>

>> Others|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Autogas

>>  
>>                       * Hybrid electric vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Liquid nitrogen vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Natural gas vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Propane

>>  
>>                       * Steam car

>>  
>>

>> Multiple-fuel|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Bi-fuel vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Flexible-fuel vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Hybrid vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Multifuel

>>  
>>                       * Plug-in hybrid

>>  
>>

>> Documentaries|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * _Who Killed the Electric Car?_

>>  
>>                       * _What Is the Electric Car?_

>>  
>>                       * _Revenge of the Electric Car_

>>  
>>

>> See also|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Wind-powered vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Zero-emissions vehicle

>>  
>>                       * v

>>  
>>                       * t

>>  
>>                       * e

>>  
>>

>> Car design

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Classification|

>>

>> | By size|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Micro

>>  
>>                       * City

>>  
>>                       * Kei

>>  
>>                       * Subcompact

>>  
>>                       * Supermini

>>  
>>                       * Family

>>  
>>                       * Compact

>>  
>>                       * Mid-size

>>  
>>                       * Full-size

>>  
>>

>> ---|---  
>  Custom|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Hot rod

>>  
>>                       * Lead sled

>>  
>>                       * Lowrider

>>  
>>                       * Street rod

>>  
>>                       * T-bucket

>>  
>>

>> Luxury|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Compact executive

>>  
>>                       * Executive

>>  
>>                       * Personal

>>  
>>

>> (MPV)|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Compact

>>  
>>                       * Mini

>>  
>>

>> (SUV)|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Compact

>>  
>>                       * Crossover (CUV)

>>  
>>                       * Mini

>>  
>>

>> Sports|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Grand tourer

>>  
>>                       * Hot hatch

>>  
>>                       * Muscle

>>  
>>                       * Pony

>>  
>>                       * Sport compact

>>  
>>                       * Super

>>  
>>                       * Antique

>>  
>>                       * Classic

>>  
>>                       * Economy

>>  
>>                       * Leisure

>>  
>>                       * Ute

>>  
>>                       * Van

>>  
>>                       * Voiturette

>>  
>>

>> Body styles|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 2+2

>>  
>>                       * Baquet

>>  
>>                       * Barchetta

>>  
>>                       * Berlinetta

>>  
>>                       * Brougham

>>  
>>                       * Cabrio coach

>>  
>>                       * Cab over

>>  
>>                       * Cabriolet / Convertible

>>  
>>                       * Coupé

>>  
>>                       * Coupé de Ville

>>  
>>                       * Coupé utility

>>  
>>                       * Drophead coupe (Convertible)

>>  
>>                       * Fastback

>>  
>>                       * Hardtop

>>  
>>                       * Hatchback

>>  
>>                       * Landaulet

>>  
>>                       * Liftback

>>  
>>                       * Limousine

>>  
>>                       * Multi-stop truck

>>  
>>                       * Notchback

>>  
>>                       * Panel van

>>  
>>                       * Phaeton

>>  
>>                       * Pickup truck

>>  
>>                       * Quad coupé

>>  
>>                       * Retractable hardtop

>>  
>>                       * Roadster

>>  
>>                       * Runabout

>>  
>>                       * Saloon / Sedan

>>  
>>                       * Sedan delivery/Panel van

>>  
>>                       * Sedanca de Ville (Coupé de Ville)

>>  
>>                       * Shooting-brake

>>  
>>                       * Spider / Spyder (Roadster)

>>  
>>                       * Station wagon

>>  
>>                       * Targa top

>>  
>>                       * Torpedo

>>  
>>                       * Touring

>>  
>>                       * Town (Coupé de Ville)

>>  
>>                       * T-top

>>  
>>                       * Vis-à-vis

>>  
>>

>> Specialized vehicles|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Amphibious

>>  
>>                       * Connected

>>  
>>                       * Driverless (autonomous)

>>  
>>                       * Hearse

>>  
>>                       * Gyrocar

>>  
>>                       * Roadable aircraft

>>  
>>                       * Taxicab

>>  
>>                       * Tow truck

>>  
>>

>> Propulsion|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Alternative fuel

>>  
>>                       * Autogas

>>  
>>                       * Biodiesel

>>  
>>                       * Diesel

>>  
>>                       * Electric (battery

>>  
>>                       * NEV)

>>  
>>                       * Ethanol (E85)

>>  
>>                       * Fuel cell

>>  
>>                       * Gasoline / petrol (direct injection)

>>  
>>                       * Homogeneous charge compression ignition

>>  
>>                       * Hybrid (plug-in)

>>  
>>                       * Hydrogen

>>  
>>                       * Internal combustion

>>  
>>                       * Liquid nitrogen

>>  
>>                       * Steam

>>  
>>

>> Drive wheels|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Front-wheel

>>  
>>                       * Rear-wheel

>>  
>>                       * Two-wheel

>>  
>>                       * Four-wheel

>>  
>>                       * Six-wheel

>>  
>>                       * Eight-wheel

>>  
>>                       * Ten-wheel

>>  
>>                       * Twelve-wheel

>>  
>>

>> Engine position|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Front

>>  
>>                       * Mid

>>  
>>                       * Rear

>>  
>>

>> Layout (engine / drive)|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Front / front

>>  
>>                       * Front mid / front

>>  
>>                       * Rear / front

>>  
>>                       * Front / rear

>>  
>>                       * Rear mid / rear

>>  
>>                       * Rear / rear

>>  
>>                       * Front / four-wheel

>>  
>>                       * Mid / four-wheel

>>  
>>                       * Rear / four-wheel

>>  
>>

>> Engine configuration  
>  (internal combustion)|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Boxer

>>  
>>                       * Flat

>>  
>>                       * Four-stroke

>>  
>>                       * H-block

>>  
>>                       * Reciprocating

>>  
>>                       * Single-cylinder

>>  
>>                       * Straight

>>  
>>                       * Two-stroke

>>  
>>                       * V (Vee)

>>  
>>                       * W engine

>>  
>>                       * Wankel

>>  
>>                       * Portal

>>  
>>                       * Category

>>  
>>                       * Template:EC car classification

>>  
>>                       * v

>>  
>>                       * t

>>  
>>                       * e

>>  
>>

>> Emerging technologies

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Fields|

>>

>> | Agriculture|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Agricultural robot

>>  
>>                       * Cellular agriculture

>>  
>>                       * Closed ecological systems

>>  
>>                       * Cultured meat

>>  
>>                       * Genetically modified food

>>  
>>                       * Precision agriculture

>>  
>>                       * Vertical farming

>>  
>>

>> ---|---  
>  Architecture|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Arcology

>>  
>>                       * Building printing

>>  
>>                         * Contour crafting

>>  
>>                       * Domed city

>>  
>>

>> Biomedical|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Artificial uterus

>>  
>>                       * Ampakine

>>  
>>                       * Brain transplant

>>  
>>                       * Cryonics

>>  
>>                         * Cryoprotectant

>>  
>>                         * Cryopreservation

>>  
>>                         * Vitrification

>>  
>>                         * Suspended animation

>>  
>>                       * De-extinction

>>  
>>                       * Genetic engineering

>>  
>>                         * Gene therapy

>>  
>>                       * Head transplant

>>  
>>                       * Isolated brain

>>  
>>                       * Life extension

>>  
>>                         * Strategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence

>>  
>>                       * Nanomedicine

>>  
>>                       * Nanosensors

>>  
>>                       * Organ printing

>>  
>>                       * Personalized medicine

>>  
>>                       * Regenerative medicine

>>  
>>                         * Stem-cell therapy

>>  
>>                         * Tissue engineering

>>  
>>                       * Robot-assisted surgery

>>  
>>                       * Synthetic biology

>>  
>>                         * Synthetic genomics

>>  
>>                       * Virotherapy

>>  
>>                         * Oncolytic virus

>>  
>>                       * Tricorder

>>  
>>                       * Whole genome sequencing

>>  
>>

>> Displays|

>>

>> | Next generation|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * FED

>>  
>>                       * FLCD

>>  
>>                       * iMoD

>>  
>>                       * Laser

>>  
>>                       * LPD

>>  
>>                       * OLED

>>  
>>                       * OLET

>>  
>>                       * QD-LED

>>  
>>                       * SED

>>  
>>                       * TPD

>>  
>>                       * TDEL

>>  
>>                       * TMOS

>>  
>>                       * MicroLED

>>  
>>

>> ---|---  
>  Screenless|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Bionic contact lens

>>  
>>                       * Head-mounted display

>>  
>>                       * Head-up display

>>  
>>                       * Optical head-mounted display

>>  
>>                       * Virtual retinal display

>>  
>>

>> Other|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Autostereoscopy

>>  
>>                       * Flexible display

>>  
>>                       * Holographic display

>>  
>>                         * Computer-generated holography

>>  
>>                       * Multi-primary color display

>>  
>>                       * Ultra HD

>>  
>>                       * Volumetric display

>>  
>>

>> Electronics|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Electronic nose

>>  
>>                       * E-textiles

>>  
>>                       * Flexible electronics

>>  
>>                       * Molecular electronics

>>  
>>                       * Nanoelectromechanical systems

>>  
>>                       * Memristor

>>  
>>                       * Spintronics

>>  
>>                       * Thermal copper pillar bump

>>  
>>                       * Twistronics

>>  
>>

>> Energy|

>>

>> | Production|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Airborne wind turbine

>>  
>>                       * Artificial photosynthesis

>>  
>>                       * Biofuels

>>  
>>                       * Carbon-neutral fuel

>>  
>>                       * Concentrated solar power

>>  
>>                       * Fusion power

>>  
>>                       * Home fuel cell

>>  
>>                       * Hydrogen economy

>>  
>>                       * Methanol economy

>>  
>>                       * Molten salt reactor

>>  
>>                       * Nantenna

>>  
>>                       * Photovoltaic pavement

>>  
>>                       * Space-based solar power

>>  
>>                       * Vortex engine

>>  
>>

>> ---|---  
>  Storage|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Beltway battery

>>  
>>                       * Compressed air energy storage

>>  
>>                       * Flywheel energy storage

>>  
>>                       * Grid energy storage

>>  
>>                       * Lithium–air battery

>>  
>>                       * Molten-salt battery

>>  
>>                       * Nanowire battery

>>  
>>                       * Research in lithium-ion batteries

>>  
>>                       * Silicon–air battery

>>  
>>                       * Thermal energy storage

>>  
>>                       * Ultracapacitor

>>  
>>

>> Other|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Smart grid

>>  
>>                       * Wireless power

>>  
>>

>> Information and  
>  communications

>>

>> |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Ambient intelligence

>>  
>>                         * Internet of things

>>  
>>                       * Artificial intelligence

>>  
>>                         * Applications of artificial intelligence

>>  
>>                         * Progress in artificial intelligence

>>  
>>                         * Machine translation

>>  
>>                         * Mobile translation

>>  
>>                         * Machine vision

>>  
>>                         * Semantic Web

>>  
>>                         * Speech recognition

>>  
>>                       * Atomtronics

>>  
>>                       * Carbon nanotube field-effect transistor

>>  
>>                       * Cybermethodology

>>  
>>                       * Fourth-generation optical discs

>>  
>>                         * 3D optical data storage

>>  
>>                         * Holographic data storage

>>  
>>                       * GPGPU

>>  
>>                       * Memory

>>  
>>                         * CBRAM

>>  
>>                         * FRAM

>>  
>>                         * Millipede

>>  
>>                         * MRAM

>>  
>>                         * NRAM

>>  
>>                         * PRAM

>>  
>>                         * Racetrack memory

>>  
>>                         * RRAM

>>  
>>                         * SONOS

>>  
>>                       * Optical computing

>>  
>>                       * RFID

>>  
>>                         * Chipless RFID

>>  
>>                       * Software-defined radio

>>  
>>                       * Three-dimensional integrated circuit

>>  
>>

>> Manufacturing|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 3D printing

>>  
>>                       * Claytronics

>>  
>>                       * Molecular assembler

>>  
>>                       * Utility fog

>>  
>>

>> Materials science|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Aerogel

>>  
>>                       * Amorphous metal

>>  
>>                       * Artificial muscle

>>  
>>                       * Conductive polymer

>>  
>>                       * Femtotechnology

>>  
>>                       * Fullerene

>>  
>>                       * Graphene

>>  
>>                       * High-temperature superconductivity

>>  
>>                       * High-temperature superfluidity

>>  
>>                       * Linear acetylenic carbon

>>  
>>                       * Metamaterials

>>  
>>                         * Metamaterial cloaking

>>  
>>                       * Metal foam

>>  
>>                       * Multi-function structures

>>  
>>                       * Nanotechnology

>>  
>>                         * Carbon nanotubes

>>  
>>                         * Molecular nanotechnology

>>  
>>                         * Nanomaterials

>>  
>>                       * Picotechnology

>>  
>>                       * Programmable matter

>>  
>>                       * Quantum dots

>>  
>>                       * Silicene

>>  
>>                       * Superalloy

>>  
>>                       * Synthetic diamond

>>  
>>

>> Military|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Antimatter weapon

>>  
>>                       * Caseless ammunition

>>  
>>                       * Directed-energy weapon

>>  
>>                         * Laser

>>  
>>                         * Maser

>>  
>>                         * Particle-beam weapon

>>  
>>                         * Sonic weapon

>>  
>>                         * Coilgun

>>  
>>                         * Railgun

>>  
>>                       * Plasma weapon

>>  
>>                       * Pure fusion weapon

>>  
>>                       * Stealth technology

>>  
>>                       * Vortex ring gun

>>  
>>

>> Neuroscience|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Artificial brain

>>  
>>                       * Brain–computer interface

>>  
>>                       * Electroencephalography

>>  
>>                       * Mind uploading

>>  
>>                         * Brain-reading

>>  
>>                         * Neuroinformatics

>>  
>>                       * Neuroprosthetics

>>  
>>                         * Bionic eye

>>  
>>                         * Brain implant

>>  
>>                         * Exocortex

>>  
>>                         * Retinal implant

>>  
>>

>> Quantum|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Quantum algorithms

>>  
>>                       * Quantum amplifier

>>  
>>                       * Quantum bus

>>  
>>                       * Quantum channel

>>  
>>                       * Quantum circuit

>>  
>>                       * Quantum complexity theory

>>  
>>                       * Quantum computing

>>  
>>                       * Quantum cryptography

>>  
>>                       * Quantum dynamics

>>  
>>                       * Quantum electronics

>>  
>>                       * Quantum error correction

>>  
>>                       * Quantum imaging

>>  
>>                       * Quantum information

>>  
>>                       * Quantum key distribution

>>  
>>                       * Quantum logic

>>  
>>                       * Quantum logic gates

>>  
>>                       * Quantum machine

>>  
>>                       * Quantum machine learning

>>  
>>                       * Quantum metamaterial

>>  
>>                       * Quantum metrology

>>  
>>                       * Quantum network

>>  
>>                       * Quantum neural network

>>  
>>                       * Quantum optics

>>  
>>                       * Quantum programming

>>  
>>                       * Quantum sensing

>>  
>>                       * Quantum simulator

>>  
>>                       * Quantum teleportation

>>  
>>

>> Robotics|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Domotics

>>  
>>                       * Nanorobotics

>>  
>>                       * Powered exoskeleton

>>  
>>                       * Self-reconfiguring modular robot

>>  
>>                       * Swarm robotics

>>  
>>                       * Uncrewed vehicle

>>  
>>

>> Space science|

>>

>> | Launch|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Fusion rocket

>>  
>>                       * Non-rocket spacelaunch

>>  
>>                         * Mass driver

>>  
>>                         * Orbital ring

>>  
>>                         * Skyhook

>>  
>>                         * Space elevator

>>  
>>                         * Space fountain

>>  
>>                         * Space tether

>>  
>>                       * Reusable launch system

>>  
>>

>> ---|---  
>  Propulsion|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Beam-powered propulsion

>>  
>>                       * Ion thruster

>>  
>>                       * Laser propulsion

>>  
>>                       * Plasma propulsion engine

>>  
>>                         * Helicon thruster

>>  
>>                         * VASIMR

>>  
>>                       * Nuclear pulse propulsion

>>  
>>                       * Solar sail

>>  
>>

>> Other|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Interstellar travel

>>  
>>                       * Propellant depot

>>  
>>                       * Laser communication in space

>>  
>>

>> Transport|

>>

>> | Aerial|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Adaptive compliant wing

>>  
>>                       * Backpack helicopter

>>  
>>                       * Delivery drone

>>  
>>                       * Flying car

>>  
>>                       * High-altitude platform

>>  
>>                       * Jet pack

>>  
>>                       * Pulse detonation engine

>>  
>>                       * Scramjet

>>  
>>                       * Spaceplane

>>  
>>                       * Supersonic transport

>>  
>>

>> ---|---  
>  Land|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Airless tire

>>  
>>                       * Alternative fuel vehicle

>>  
>>                         * Hydrogen vehicle

>>  
>>                       * Driverless car

>>  
>>                       * Ground effect train

>>  
>>                       * Hyperloop

>>  
>>                       * Maglev train

>>  
>>                       * Personal rapid transit

>>  
>>                       * Transit Elevated Bus

>>  
>>                       * Vactrain

>>  
>>                       * Vehicular communication systems

>>  
>>

>> Pipeline|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pneumatic transport

>>  
>>                         * Automated vacuum collection

>>  
>>

>> Other|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Anti-gravity

>>  
>>                       * Cloak of invisibility

>>  
>>                       * Digital scent technology

>>  
>>                       * Force field

>>  
>>                         * Plasma window

>>  
>>                       * Immersive virtual reality

>>  
>>                       * Magnetic refrigeration

>>  
>>                       * Phased-array optics

>>  
>>

>> Topics|

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Collingridge dilemma

>>  
>>                       * Differential technological development

>>  
>>                       * Disruptive Innovation

>>  
>>                       * Ephemeralization

>>  
>>                       * Exploratory engineering

>>  
>>                       * Fictional technology

>>  
>>                       * Proactionary principle

>>  
>>                       * Technological change

>>  
>>                         * Technological unemployment

>>  
>>                       * Technological convergence

>>  
>>                       * Technological evolution

>>  
>>                       * Technological paradigm

>>  
>>                       * Technology forecasting

>>  
>>                         * Accelerating change

>>  
>>                         * Moore's law

>>  
>>                         * Technological singularity

>>  
>>                         * Technology scouting

>>  
>>                       * Technology readiness level

>>  
>>                       * Technology roadmap

>>  
>>                       * Transhumanism

>>  
>>                       *

>>  
>>

>>
![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-

Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) **Category**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![List-Class

>>  
>>

>>
article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-
Symbol_list_class.svg.png) **List**

>>

>> ![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

>>

>> Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alternative_fuel_vehicle&oldid=896148571"

>>

>> Categories:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Vehicle technology

>>  
>>                       * Green vehicles

>>  
>>                       * Emerging technologies

>>  
>>                       * Alternative fuels

>>  
>>

>> Hidden categories:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CS1 Portuguese-language sources
(pt)

>>  
>>                       * CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv)

>>  
>>                       * CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)

>>  
>>                       * Articles containing potentially dated statements
from September

>>  
>>

>> 2018

>>  
>>                 >>                       * All articles containing
potentially dated statements

>>  
>>                       * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list

>>  
>>                       * Articles containing potentially dated statements
from December

>>  
>>

>> 2016

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CS1 French-language sources (fr)

>>  
>>                       * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title

>>  
>>                       * Webarchive template wayback links

>>  
>>                       * All articles with dead external links

>>  
>>                       * Articles with dead external links from January 2017

>>  
>>                       * Articles with permanently dead external links

>>  
>>                       * Articles with dead external links from September
2017

>>  
>>                       * CS1 maint: Extra text: authors list

>>  
>>                       * CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja)

>>  
>>                       * Articles with dead external links from July 2017

>>  
>>                       * Articles with dead external links from October 2010

>>  
>>                       * Articles containing potentially dated statements
from 2017

>>  
>>                       * Articles containing potentially dated statements
from June 2015

>>  
>>                       * Articles containing potentially dated statements
from August

>>  
>>

>> 2015

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Articles containing potentially
dated statements from April 2016

>>  
>>                       * Articles containing potentially dated statements
from January

>>  
>>

>> 2017

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Articles containing potentially
dated statements from June 2014

>>  
>>                       * Articles containing potentially dated statements
from December

>>  
>>

>> 2015

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Articles needing additional
references from September 2008

>>  
>>                       * All articles needing additional references

>>  
>>                       * All articles with unsourced statements

>>  
>>                       * Articles with unsourced statements from October
2017

>>  
>>                       * Articles containing potentially dated statements
from December

>>  
>>

>> 2012

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Articles with unsourced
statements from January 2010

>>  
>>                       * Articles containing potentially dated statements
from March 2014

>>  
>>

>> ## Navigation menu

>>

>> ### Personal tools

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Not logged in

>>  
>>                       * Talk

>>  
>>                       * Contributions

>>  
>>                       * Create account

>>  
>>                       * Log in

>>  
>>

>> ### Namespaces

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Article

>>  
>>                       * Talk

>>  
>>

>> ### Variants

>>

>> ### Views

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Read

>>  
>>                       * Edit

>>  
>>                       * View history

>>  
>>

>> ### More

>>

>> ### Search

>>

>> ### Navigation

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Main page

>>  
>>                       * Contents

>>  
>>                       * Featured content

>>  
>>                       * Current events

>>  
>>                       * Random article

>>  
>>                       * Donate to Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Wikipedia store

>>  
>>

>> ### Interaction

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Help

>>  
>>                       * About Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Community portal

>>  
>>                       * Recent changes

>>  
>>                       * Contact page

>>  
>>

>> ### Tools

>>  
>>                 >>                       * What links here

>>  
>>                       * Related changes

>>  
>>                       * Upload file

>>  
>>                       * Special pages

>>  
>>                       * Permanent link

>>  
>>                       * Page information

>>  
>>                       * Wikidata item

>>  
>>                       * Cite this page

>>  
>>

>> ### Print/export

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Create a book

>>  
>>                       * Download as PDF

>>  
>>                       * Printable version

>>  
>>

>> ### Languages

>>  
>>                 >>                       * فارسی

>>  
>>                       * Bahasa Indonesia

>>  
>>                       * Română

>>  
>>                       * Simple English

>>  
>>                       * Suomi

>>  
>>                       * 中文

>>  
>>

>> Edit links

>>  
>>                 >>                       * This page was last edited on 8
May 2019, at 16:04 (UTC).

>>  
>>                       * Text is available under the Creative Commons
Attribution-

>>  
>>

>> ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you
agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Privacy policy

>>  
>>                       * About Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Disclaimers

>>  
>>                       * Contact Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Developers

>>  
>>                       * Cookie statement

>>  
>>                       * Mobile view

>>  
>>                       * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-
button.png)

>>  
>>                       * ![Powered by

>>  
>>

>> MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

