
>

>> Accessibility links

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Skip to article

>>  
>>                       * Skip to navigation

>>  
>>

>> ![](/template/ver1-0/i/telegraph_print_190.gif)

>>

>> Telegraph.co.uk

>>

>> Friday 07 June 2019

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * Video

>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * World

>>  
>>                       * Sport

>>  
>>                       * Business

>>  
>>                       * Money

>>  
>>                       * Comment

>>  
>>                       * Culture

>>  
>>                       * Travel

>>  
>>                       * Life

>>  
>>                       * Women

>>  
>>                       * Fashion

>>  
>>                       * Luxury

>>  
>>                       * Tech

>>  
>>                       * Film

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Politics

>>  
>>                       * Investigations

>>  
>>                       * Obits

>>  
>>                       * Education

>>  
>>                       * Science

>>  
>>                       * Earth

>>  
>>                       * Weather

>>  
>>                       * Health

>>  
>>                       * Royal

>>  
>>                       * Celebrity

>>  
>>                       * Defence

>>  
>>                       * Scotland

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * Environment

>>  
>>                       * Climate Change

>>  
>>                       * Wildlife

>>  
>>                       * Picture Galleries

>>  
>>                       * Earth Video

>>  
>>                       * Tree diseases

>>  
>>

>> Advertisement

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. Home»

>>  
>>                       2. News»

>>  
>>                       3. Earth»

>>  
>>                       4. Environment

>>  
>>

>> # Climate change ad showing drowning puppies to be investigated after 300

>>

>> complaints

>>

>> ## A Government climate change advert featuring drowning puppies and crying

>>

>> rabbits will be investigated by the advertising watchdog after receiving
hundreds of complaints from the public.

>>

>> ![Cartoon of a crying rabbit: Climate change ad showing drowning puppies to

be investigated after 300

complaints](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01507/Untitled-1_1507065c.jpg)

>>

>> Cartoon images of a puppy drowning in floods, a kitten floating on an
upturned table and a rabbit weeping as drought takes hold in its habitat, are
all part of the advert Photo: Act on CO2

>>

>> ![Urmee

Khan](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01460/urmeek_1460024j.jpg)

>>

>> By Urmee Khan, Digital and Media Correspondent

>>

>> 7:00AM BST 22 Oct 2009

>>

>> The advert begins with a father reading a bedtime story to his daughter
which turns into a frightening account of the impact of climate change.

>>

>> He is heard saying that "some places could even disappear under the sea"
adding that "children would have to live with the horrible consequences".

>>

>> Cartoon images of a puppy drowning in floods, a kitten floating on an
upturned table and a rabbit weeping as drought takes hold in its habitat, are
all part of the advert.

>>

>> The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) said the advert had prompted 375
complaints. It will now investigate and look into claims that the 70 second
advert should not have been shown before the 9pm watershed because children
would have been watching.

>>

>> It will also examine whether the advert would have been 'distressing' for
youngsters and whether it constituted 'scaremongering'.

>>

>> ## Related Articles

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Government 'fiddling the
figures' on climate change

>>  
>>

>> 22 Oct 2009

>>

>> The Department of Energy and Climate Change launched the £6 million pound
campaign earlier this month.

>>

>> The DECC produced the hard-hitting advert after research showed that more
than half of the UK public think climate change will have no effect on them.

>>

>> A Downing Street petition that calls on the Government to 'stop wasting
taxpayers' money on climate change propaganda designed to frighten out
children' had attracted more than 500 signatures.

>>

>> Joan Ruddock, the Energy and climate change minister, has stood by the
adverts saying it was consistent with Government policy on the issue.

>>

>> She said it was based on the latest science and assessments and said it was
not aimed at children but adults.

>>

>> The investigation is expected to last for two to three months before a
ruling is made.

>>

>> ## Environment

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ### News »

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ### Media »

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ### Earth »

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ### Earth News »

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ### TV and Radio »

>>  
>>

>> In Environment

>>

>>
![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03552/Gannet_SUMM_3552451g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Grassholm's gannet rescue mission

>>

>> ![A man wears a mask to protect himself from pollution in

Beijing](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03521/beijing-

masks_3521109g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Baijing's first ever red alert

>>

>> ![Northern Ireland: The Dark Hedges (Bregagh Road, Stranocum, Ballymoney)

>

> Nominated by June Boyd and Carole O’Kane

>

> This beautiful avenue of beech trees was planted by the Stuart family in the
eighteenth century. It

>

> was intended as a compelling landscape feature to impress visitors as they
approached the entrance

>

> to their Georgian mansion, Gracehill House. (James Stuart built Gracehill
House in c.1775 and

>

> named it after his wife, Grace Lynd.) Two centuries later, the trees remain
a magnificent sight and

>

> have become one of the most photographed natural phenomena in Northern
Ireland. In fact, the

>

> iconic trees have been used as a filming location in the epic TV series Game
of Thrones, representing

>

> the King's Road. According to folklore, a Grey Lady haunts this atmospheric
avenue of intertwined

>

> beech
trees.](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03447/The_Dark_Hedges__B_3447627g.jpg)

>

>> ### Tree of the Year 2015, in pictures

>>

>> ![Basking shark \(Ceterhinus maximus\) feeding on plankton around St

Michael's Mount, Cornwall,

UK](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03390/Basking_shark_3390004g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Britains surprising sea life

>>

>>
![Fisherman](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03381/Fish_SUMM_3381265g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Gone fishing

>>

>> ![sea

lions](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03250/summ_3250703g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Unexpected guests

>>

>> ![These rare shots capture the seldom-seen underside of an

iceberg](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03196/antarctica-

ice-clo_3196137g.jpg)  
>

>>

>> ### Ice, ice baby

>>

>> Top news galleries

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> ![](http://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/imp.gif?client=ca-

telegraph_uk_420x200&event=noscript)

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> Latest Video»

>>

>> ![Rat climbs over

man](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/Rat_climbs_over_ma_3602877g.jpg)

>>

>> ### Large rat climbs on sleeping commuter

>>

>>
![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/grandad_3602577g.jpg)

>>

>> ### Disabled great-grandfather denied stairlift and forced to crawl

>>

>> ![Old and frail wombat is

rescued](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/Wombat-1-e_3602888g.jpg)

>>

>> ### Elderly wombat rescued after being attacked

>>

>> ![Scientist in lab

](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03549/scientist-in-

lab_3549159g.jpg)

>>

>> Sponsored

>>

>> ### When media meets medicine

>>

>> More from the web

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> Advertisement

>>

>> More from the web

>>

>> Loading

>>

>> More from The Telegraph

>>

>> Loading

>>

>> News

>>

>> ![Progress 17 supply vehicle departs from the International Space

Station](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03285/Progress_17__3285797f.jpg)

>>

>> ### The latest news, opinion and analysis

>>

>> View

>>

>> Football

>>

>> ![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03101/old-

trafford_3101399f.jpg)

>>

>> ### Catch up on all the latest football news and results

>>

>> View

>>

>> Film

>>

>> ![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03208/oscars-

summary-2_3208754f.jpg)

>>

>> ### All the latest film trailers, reviews and features

>>

>> View

>>

>> Competitions

>>

>> ![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03614/Malta-

TD_3614608f.jpg)

>>

>> ### Enter one of our exciting new competitions

>>

>> View

>>

>> Back to top

>>  
>>                 >>                       * HOME

>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * UK News

>>  
>>                       * Politics

>>  
>>                       * Long Reads

>>  
>>                       * Wikileaks

>>  
>>                       * Jobs

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * World News

>>  
>>                       * Europe

>>  
>>                       * USA

>>  
>>                       * China

>>  
>>                       * Royal Family News

>>  
>>                       * Celebrity news

>>  
>>                       * Dating

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Finance

>>  
>>                       * Education

>>  
>>                       * Defence

>>  
>>                       * Weird News

>>  
>>                       * Editor's Choice

>>  
>>                       * Financial Services

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pictures

>>  
>>                       * Video

>>  
>>                       * Matt

>>  
>>                       * Alex

>>  
>>                       * Comment

>>  
>>                       * Blogs

>>  
>>                       * Crossword

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Contact us

>>  
>>                       * Privacy and Cookies

>>  
>>                       * Advertising

>>  
>>                       * Fantasy Football

>>  
>>                       * Tickets

>>  
>>                       * Announcements

>>  
>>                       * Reader Prints

>>  
>>                       *           * Follow Us

>>  
>>                       * Apps

>>  
>>                       * Epaper

>>  
>>                       * Expat

>>  
>>                       * Promotions

>>  
>>                       * Subscriber

>>  
>>                       * Syndication

>>  
>>

>> (C) Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2019

>>

>> Terms and Conditions

>>

>> Today's News

>>

>> Archive

>>

>> Style Book

>>

>> Weather Forecast

>>

>> ![](//secure-uk.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=uk-101665h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

