
>

>> Skip to main content

>>

>> Environmental Defense Fund

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Careers

>>  
>>                       * Offices

>>  
>>                       * Contact us

>>  
>>                       * For the media

>>  
>>

>> Search:

>>

>> Donate

>>

>> ## Breadcrumb

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. Home

>>  
>>                       2. Our work

>>  
>>                       3. Climate and energy

>>  
>>                       4. The problem

>>  
>>                       5. What causes it

>>  
>>

>> # 9 ways we know humans triggered climate change

>>

>> Most Americans recognize climate change, but some are still unsure about
its causes.

>>

>> Tens of thousands of scientists in more than a hundred nations have amassed
an overwhelming amount of evidence pointing to a clear conclusion: **Humans
are the main cause.**

>>

>> We're the ones who burn fossil fuels and clear trees that absorb carbon
dioxide, sending heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere.

>>

>> ## It's like the smoking-cancer link

>>

>> No one questions the link between smoking and cancer, because the science
was settled in the 1960s after more than 50 years of research.

>>

>> We can think of the state of human activities and climate change as no
different than smoking and cancer.

>>

>> In fact, we are as confident that humans cause climate change than that
smoking causes cancer.

>>

>>> Scientists are more confident than ever that humans are causing global
warming.

>>>

>>> ![Ilissa Ocko](/sites/default/files/ilissa-ocko_48_x_48_0.jpg)

>>>

>>> Ilissa Ocko, Climate Scientist

>>

>> ## So what's the evidence?

>>

>> The research falls into nine independently studied, but physically related,
lines of evidence:

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. **Simple chemistry** â€“ when we
burn carbon-based materials,

>>  
>>

>> carbon dioxide (CO2) is emitted (research beginning in 1900s)

>>  
>>                 >>                       2. **Basic accounting** of what we
burn, and therefore how much

>>  
>>

>> CO2 we emit (data collection beginning in 1970s)

>>  
>>                 >>                       3. **Measuring CO2** in the
atmosphere and trapped in ice to find

>>  
>>

>> that it's increasing, with levels higher than anything we've seen in
hundreds of thousands of years (measurements beginning in 1950s)

>>  
>>                 >>                       4. **Chemical analysis** of the
atmospheric CO2 that reveals the

>>  
>>

>> increase is coming from burning fossil fuels (research beginning in 1950s)

>>  
>>                 >>                       5. **Basic physics** that shows us
that CO2 absorbs heat (research

>>  
>>

>> beginning in 1820s)

>>  
>>                 >>                       6. **Monitoring climate
conditions** to find that recent warming

>>  
>>

>> of the Earth is correlated to and follows rising CO2 emissions (research
beginning in 1930s)

>>  
>>                 >>                       7. **Ruling out natural factors**
that can influence climate like

>>  
>>

>> the sun and ocean cycles (research beginning in 1830s)

>>  
>>                 >>                       8. **Employing computer models**
to run experiments of natural

>>  
>>

>> versus human-influenced simulations of Earth (research beginning in 1960s)

>>  
>>                 >>                       9. **Consensus among scientists**
who consider all previous lines

>>  
>>

>> of evidence and make their own conclusions (polling beginning in 1990s)

>>

>> ## Support sound climate science

>>

>> Sign up for alerts to see how you can help. (See our privacy policy.)

>>

>> ![](/themes/edf/images/transparent1px.png)
![](/sites/default/files/thumbnail/man_looking_at_emissions_from_industrial_smokestacks_600_x_600_0.jpg)

>>

>> ## What are the facts?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 97%of scientists say humans are
responsible for global warming

>>  
>>                       * 40%more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere since the
Industrial

>>  
>>

>> Revolution

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 70 _million_ metric tons of
carbon dioxide we add to the

>>  
>>

>> atmosphere daily

>>

>> Sources: "Consensus on consensus," U.S. National Climate Assessment and
NOAA

>>

>> 7 ways climate change is affecting daily life

>>

>> view

>>

>> 1 year 9 months ago

>>

>> 1 week 6 days ago

>>

>> 8

>>

>> Think your beer is safe? Think again.

>>

>> Think your beer is safe? Think again.

>>

>> Share

>>

>> Donate now

>>

>> ## Main navigation

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Our work

>>  
>>                         * Climate and energy

>>  
>>                           * Global initiatives

>>  
>>                           * Clean energy

>>  
>>                           * Oil and gas

>>  
>>                           * Stronger laws and policies

>>  
>>                         * Health

>>  
>>                           * Cleaner air

>>  
>>                           * Safer chemicals

>>  
>>                         * Oceans

>>  
>>                           * Overfishing: How bad is it?

>>  
>>                           * Restoring fisheries

>>  
>>                           * Fisheries finance

>>  
>>                           * Work by region

>>  
>>                         * Ecosystems

>>  
>>                           * Sustainable agriculture

>>  
>>                           * Wildlife protection

>>  
>>                           * Coastal resilience

>>  
>>                           * Western water

>>  
>>                         * Where we work

>>  
>>                           * International websites

>>  
>>                       * How we get results

>>  
>>                         * Science

>>  
>>                           * Sensor technology

>>  
>>                           * Our scientists

>>  
>>                         * Economics

>>  
>>                           * Case study: Acid rain

>>  
>>                           * Case study: Energy markets

>>  
>>                           * Research and partnerships

>>  
>>                         * Fourth Wave: Innovation

>>  
>>                           * Fourth Wave: A quick history

>>  
>>                         * Partnerships

>>  
>>                           * Business and industry

>>  
>>                           * Collaborating with Walmart

>>  
>>                           * Our experts

>>  
>>                         * Nonpartisan policy

>>  
>>                           * Case study: Delta recovery

>>  
>>                           * Our experts

>>  
>>                         * Our impact

>>  
>>                           * Case study: McDonald's

>>  
>>                           * Past achievements

>>  
>>                       * How you can help

>>  
>>                         * Take action

>>  
>>                           * Sign up for updates

>>  
>>                           * EPA in danger

>>  
>>                         * Getting results together

>>  
>>                           * Solutions newsletter

>>  
>>                           * Become a member

>>  
>>                           * Renew your membership

>>  
>>                         * Make a donation

>>  
>>                           * Our charity ratings

>>  
>>                           * Honor someone special

>>  
>>                         * More ways to give

>>  
>>                           * Donor-Advised Funds

>>  
>>                           * Workplace giving

>>  
>>                           * Planned giving

>>  
>>                         * Special giving circles

>>  
>>                           * Catalyst Circle

>>  
>>                           * Osprey Society

>>  
>>                           * Leadership Team

>>  
>>                           * Eco Partner

>>  
>>                       * About us

>>  
>>                         * Mission and values

>>  
>>                           * Our story

>>  
>>                           * Diversity

>>  
>>                           * Strategic plan

>>  
>>                         * 2018 annual report

>>  
>>                           * Financial information

>>  
>>                           * Previous annual reports

>>  
>>                         * Our people

>>  
>>                           * Board of trustees

>>  
>>                           * Executive team

>>  
>>                           * Q&A with Ilissa Ocko

>>  
>>                         * Careers

>>  
>>                           * Culture

>>  
>>                           * Internships and fellowships

>>  
>>                         * Our offices

>>  
>>                           * Beijing

>>  
>>                           * London

>>  
>>                           * New York

>>  
>>                           * San Francisco

>>  
>>                           * Washington, D.C.

>>  
>>                           * Complete list

>>  
>>                       * News and blogs

>>  
>>                         * EDF Voices blog

>>  
>>                           * Economics

>>  
>>                           * Innovation

>>  
>>                           * Partnerships

>>  
>>                           * Politics

>>  
>>                           * Science

>>  
>>                           * All posts

>>  
>>                         * EDF blog network

>>  
>>                           * Climate 411

>>  
>>                           * EDF+Business

>>  
>>                           * EDF Health

>>  
>>                           * Energy Exchange

>>  
>>                           * Growing Returns

>>  
>>                           * Oceans blog: EDFish

>>  
>>                         * For the media

>>  
>>                         * Reports and publications

>>  
>>

>> ![EDF](/themes/edf/images/transparent1px.png)

>>

>> #### About EDF

>>

>> Contact us Offices International websites

>>

>> #### Resources

>>

>> Blogs Reports and publications Media contacts

>>

>> #### Members

>>

>> Become a member Visit MyEDF How you can help

>>

>> #### Connect

>>

>> Facebook Twitter LinkedIn

>>

>> About this site * Privacy policy

>>

>> 257 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10010  
>  Copyright (C) 2019 Environmental Defense Fund. All Rights Reserved.

>>

>> Back to top

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

