
>

>> Asset 5arrow-downarrow-leftarrow-rightarrow-uparticleAsset 31Asset 2Asset
7Asset 6Asset 7Asset 15Asset 16cartAsset 51cart-filledAsset 52checkAsset
50Asset 3chevron-upchevron-leftchevron-rightchevron-upclosecomment-newcomment-
filledAsset 11double-caret-downdouble-chevron-downAsset 55double-chevron-
upAsset 56email-newemail-filledAsset 14Asset 2fullscreen-closefullscreen-
opengallerygallery-filledAsset 15GlobegridAsset 17grid-filledAsset
18headphones-newheadphones-filledAsset 19heart-filledheart-
openinteractiveAsset 73linkAsset 48loadingAsset 45Artboard 1minusmutedAsset
29muted-filledAsset 30ng-borderAsset 8pauseAsset 40pause-filledAsset 39Asset
12Asset 13playAsset 33play-filledAsset
32plusNG_AD_Iconography_111317_JY_v2Asset 3replayAsset 11Asset 10Asset
4SearchIconshareAsset 34facebookgithubArtboard 1Artboard
1linkedinlinkedin_inpinterestpinterest_psnapchatsnapchat_2twitterwhatsappspeakerAsset
27speaker-filledAsset 28star-filledstar-opentextAsset 43text-filledAsset
42tiltAsset 58Asset 8Asset 9Asset 4userAsset 53user-filledvideo-cameraAsset
35video-camera-filledAsset 36volumeAsset 25volume-filledAsset 26

>>

>> ![](/etc/designs/platform/v2/images/logos/ng-black-

logo.ngsversion.5ce5f96b.png)
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/global-warming-
causes.html

>>

>> (C) 1996-2015 National Geographic Society, (C) 2015- 2019 National
Geographic Partners, LLC. All rights reserved

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Reference

>>

>> # Causes of global warming, explained

>>

>> ## Human activity is driving climate change, including global temperature

>>

>> rise.

>>

>> Causes and Effects of Climate Change

>>

>> Learn the human impact and consequences of climate change for the
environment, and our lives.

>>

>> Reference

>>

>> # Causes of global warming, explained

>>

>> ## Human activity is driving climate change, including global temperature

>>

>> rise.

>>

>> Causes and Effects of Climate Change

>>

>> Learn the human impact and consequences of climate change for the
environment, and our lives.

>>

>> 2 Minute Read

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> PUBLISHED January 17, 2019

>>

>> The average temperature of the Earth is rising at nearly twice the rate it
was 50 years ago. This rapid warming trend cannot be explained by natural
cycles alone, scientists have concluded. The only way to explain the pattern
is to include the effect of greenhouse gases (GHGs) emitted by humans.

>>

>> Current levels of the greenhouse gases carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous
oxide in our atmosphere are higher than at any point over the past 800,000
years, and their ability to trap heat is changing our climate in multiple
ways.

>>

>> ## IPCC conclusions

>>

>> To come to a scientific conclusion on climate change and what to do about
it, the United Nations in 1988 formed a group called the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, or IPCC. The IPCC meets every few years to review the
latest scientific findings and write a report summarizing all that is known
about global warming. Each report represents a consensus, or agreement, among
hundreds of leading scientists.

>>

>> One of the first things the IPCC concluded is that there are several
greenhouse gases responsible for warming, and humans emit them in a variety of
ways. Most come from the combustion of fossil fuels in cars, buildings,
factories, and power plants. The gas responsible for the most warming is
carbon dioxide, or CO2. Other contributors include methane released from
landfills, natural gas and petroleum industries, and agriculture (especially
from the digestive systems of grazing animals); nitrous oxide from
fertilizers; gases used for refrigeration and industrial processes; and the
loss of forests that would otherwise store CO2.

>>

>> ## Gaseous abilities

>>

>> Different greenhouse gases have very different heat-trapping abilities.
Some of them can trap more heat than an equivalent amount of CO2. A molecule
of methane doesn't hang around the atmosphere as long as a molecule of carbon
dioxide will, but it is at least 84 times more potent over two decades.
Nitrous oxide is 264 times more powerful than CO2.

>>

>> Climate Change 101 with Bill Nye Climate Change is a real and serious
issue. In this video Bill Nye, the Science Guy, explains what causes climate
change, how it affects our planet, why we need to act promptly to mitigate its
effects, and how each of us can contribute to a solution.  
>

>>

>> Other gases, such as chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs—which have been banned in
much of the world because they also degrade the ozone layer—have heat-trapping
potential thousands of times greater than CO2. But because their emissions are
much lower than CO2, none of these gases trap as much heat in the atmosphere
as CO2 does.

>>

>> When those gases that humans are adding to Earth's atmosphere trap heat,
it’s called the "greenhouse effect." The gases let light through but then keep
much of the heat that radiates from the surface from escaping back into space,
like the glass walls of a greenhouse. The more greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere, the more dramatic the effect, and the more warming that happens.

>>

>> ## Climate change continues

>>

>> Despite global efforts to address climate change, including the landmark
2015 Paris climate agreement, carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels
continue to rise, hitting record levels in 2018.

>>

>> Many people think of global warming and climate change as synonyms, but
scientists prefer to use “climate change” when describing the complex shifts
now affecting our planet’s weather and climate systems. Climate change
encompasses not only rising average temperatures but also extreme weather
events, shifting wildlife populations and and habitats, rising seas, and a
range of other impacts.

>>

>> **  
> Read next:** Global Warming Effects

>>

>> Continue Reading

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

