

# Right to keep and bear arms in the United States

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

## Firearm legal topics of the

United States of America  
![Greater coat of arms of the United

States.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5b/Greater_coat_of_arms_of_the_United_States.svg/90px-

Greater_coat_of_arms_of_the_United_States.svg.png)

  * **Amendment II**

* * *

  * Assault weapon
  * Assault weapons legislation
  * Bump stocks
  * Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,  
Firearms and Explosives (ATF)

  * Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act

  * Campus carry in the U.S.
  * Concealed carry in the U.S.
  * Connecticut Children's Safety Act
  * Constitutional carry
  * Domestic Violence Offender Gun Ban
  * Federal Assault Weapons Ban
  * Federal Firearms Act of 1938
  * Federal Firearms License
  * Firearm case law
  * Firearm Owners Protection Act
  * Gun Control Act of 1968
  * Gun-Free School Zones Act (GFSZA)
  * Gun law in the U.S.
  * Gun laws in the U.S. by state
  * Gun politics in the U.S.
  * High-capacity magazine ban
  * History of concealed carry in the U.S.
  * International treaties for arms control
  * National Instant Criminal  
Background Check System (NICS)

  * National Firearms Act (NFA)

  * NY SAFE Act
  * Open carry in the U.S.
  * Right to keep and bear arms in the U.S.
  * Second Amendment sanctuary
  * Sullivan Act (New York)
  * Suppressor
  * Tiahrt Amendment
  * Violent Crime Control  
and Law Enforcement Act

![Flag of the United

States.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/a/a4/Flag_of_the_United_States.svg/16px-

Flag_of_the_United_States.svg.png) United States portal

  * v
  * t
  * e

Constitutional Law  
of the United States

* * *

![Scale of justice

2.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0e/Scale_of_justice_2.svg/100px-

Scale_of_justice_2.svg.png)  
Overview

  * Articles
  * Amendments

  * History

  * Judicial review

Principles

  * Separation of powers
  * Individual rights
  * Rule of law
  * Federalism
  * Republicanism

Government structure

  * Legislative branch
  * Executive branch

  * Judicial branch

  * State government
  * Local government

Individual rights

  * Freedom of religion
  * Freedom of speech
  * Freedom of the press
  * Freedom of assembly
  * Right to petition
  * Freedom of association
  * Right to keep and bear arms
  * Right to trial by jury
  * Criminal procedural rights
  * Right to privacy
  * Freedom from slavery
  * Due process
  * Equal protection
  * Citizenship
  * Voting rights
  * Comprehensible rules

Theory

  * Living Constitution
  * Originalism
  * Purposivism
  * Textualism
  * Strict constructionism

  * v

  * t
  * e

The **right to keep and bear arms in the United States** is a fundamental
right[1][2][3] protected by the Second Amendment to the United States
Constitution, part of the Bill of Rights, and by the constitutions of most
U.S. states.[4] The Second Amendment declares:

> A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free state,
the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.[5][6]

In the United States, which has an English common law tradition, the concept
of a right to keep and bear arms was recognized prior to the creation of a
written national constitution.[7] When colonists in the Thirteen Colonies
rebelled against British control during the American Revolution they cited the
1689 English Bill of Rights as an example.

## Contents

  * 1 English precedent
  * 2 Civilian usage meaning
  * 3 Military service and civilian usage meanings
  * 4 Early commentary in federal courts
    * 4.1 _Dred Scott v. Sandford_
  * 5 Early commentary in state courts
    * 5.1 Bliss
    * 5.2 Aymette
    * 5.3 Nunn
    * 5.4 Buzzard
    * 5.5 _Salina v. Blaksley_
  * 6 Modern commentary
    * 6.1 Interpretive Models
    * 6.2 Federal case commentary
    * 6.2.1 _United States v. Miller_
    * 6.2.2 _District of Columbia v. Heller_
    * 6.2.3 _McDonald v. Chicago_
  * 7 The politics of the right to keep and bear arms
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References

## English precedent[edit]

See also: Assize of Arms of 1181

The American understanding of the right to keep and bear arms was influenced
by the 1689 English Bill of Rights, an Act of Parliament, which also dealt
with personal defence by Protestant English subjects.

The Bill of Rights did not create a new right to have arms but rather
rescinded and deplored acts of the deposed King James II, a Roman Catholic,
who had forced the disarming of Protestants, while arming and deploying armed
Catholics contrary to Law (among other alleged violations of individual
rights). The Bill of Rights provided that Protestants could bear arms for
their defence as permitted by law. It also established that the power to
regulate the right to bear arms belonged to Parliament, not the monarch.[8]

Sir William Blackstone wrote in the eighteenth century about the right to have
arms being auxiliary to the "natural right of resistance and self-
preservation", but conceded that the right was subject to their suitability
and allowance by law.

> The fifth and last auxiliary right of the subject, that I shall at present
mention, is that of having arms for their defence, suitable to their condition
and degree, and such as are allowed by law. Which is also declared by the same
statute and is indeed a public allowance, under due restrictions, of the
natural right of resistance and self-preservation, when the sanctions of
society and laws are found insufficient to restrain the violence of
oppression.[9]

## Civilian usage meaning[edit]

In _United States v. Cruikshank_ (1876), the U.S. Supreme Court recognized
that the right to arms preexisted the Constitution and in that case and in
_Presser v. Illinois_ (1886) recognized that the Second Amendment protected
the right from being infringed by Congress. In _United States v. Miller_
(1939), the Court again recognized that the right to arms is individually held
and, citing the Tennessee case of _Aymette v State_ , indicated that it
protected the right to keep and bear arms that are "part of the ordinary
military equipment" or the use of which could "contribute to the common
defense." In its first opportunity to rule specifically on whose right the
Second Amendment protects, _District of Columbia v. Heller_ (2008), the Court
ruled that the amendment protects an individual right "to keep and carry arms
in case of confrontation," not contingent on service in a militia, while
indicating, in dicta, that restrictions on the possession of firearms by
felons and the mentally ill, on the carrying of arms in sensitive locations,
and with respect to the conditions on the sale of firearms could pass
constitutional muster. In the 2010 case of McDonald v. Chicago, the Court
applied incorporation doctrine to extend the Second Amendment's protections
nationwide.

The people's right to have their own arms for their defense is described in
the philosophical and political writings of Aristotle, Cicero, John Locke,
Machiavelli, the English Whigs and others.[10][ _need quotation to verify_ ]
Though possessing arms appears to be distinct from "bearing" them, the
possession of arms is recognized as necessary for and a logical precursor to
the bearing of arms.[11] Don Kates, a civil liberties lawyer, cites historic
English usage describing the "right to keep and bear _their private
arms_."[12] Likewise, Sayoko Blodgett-Ford notes a non-military usage of the
phrase in a pamphlet widely circulated by the dissenting minority dating from
the time of the Pennsylvania ratifying convention for the U.S. Constitution:

> [T]he people have a right to bear arms for the defense of themselves and
their own state, or the United States, or the purpose of killing game; and no
law shall be passed for disarming the people or any of them, unless for crimes
committed ...[13]

In commentary written by Judge Garwood in _United States v. Emerson_ , the
United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit concluded in 2001
that:[14]

> ... there are numerous instances of the phrase 'bear arms' being used to
describe a civilian's carrying of arms. Early constitutional provisions or
declarations of rights in at least some ten different states speak of the
right of the 'people' [or 'citizen' or 'citizens'] "to bear arms in defense of
themselves [or 'himself'] and the state,' or equivalent words, thus
indisputably reflecting that under common usage 'bear arms' was in no sense
restricted to bearing arms in military service. See _Bliss v. Commonwealth_ ,
13 Am. Dec. 251, 12 Ky. 90 (Ky. 1822).[15]

Similarly, in a released Senate report on the Right to Keep and Bear Arms,
Senator Orrin Hatch, chairman, U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee, Subcommittee
on the Constitution, states:

> They argue that the Second Amendment's words "right of the people" mean "a
right of the state" â€“ apparently overlooking the impact of those same words
when used in the First and Fourth Amendments. The "right of the people" to
assemble or to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures is not
contested as an individual guarantee. Still they ignore consistency and claim
that the right to "bear arms" relates only to military uses. This not only
violates a consistent constitutional reading of "right of the people" but also
ignores that the second amendment protects a right to "keep" arms. "When our
ancestors forged a land "conceived in liberty", they did so with musket and
rifle. When they reacted to attempts to dissolve their free institutions, and
established their identity as a free nation, they did so as a nation of armed
freemen. When they sought to record forever a guarantee of their rights, they
devoted one full amendment out of ten to nothing but the protection of their
right to keep and bear arms against governmental interference. Under my
chairmanship the Subcommittee on the Constitution will concern itself with a
proper recognition of, and respect for, this right most valued by free
men.[16]

Likewise, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in _District of Columbia v. Heller_
(2008), No. 07-290, that "[t]he Second Amendment protects an individual right
to possess a firearm unconnected with service in a militia, and to use that
arm for traditionally lawful purposes, such as self-defense within the
home."[17]

## Military service and civilian usage meanings[edit]

Some historians have argued that prior to and through the 18th century, the
expression "bear arms" appeared exclusively in military contexts, as opposed
to the use of firearms by civilians.[18][19][20][21]

> In late-eighteenth-century parlance, _bearing arms_ was a term of art with
an obvious military and legal connotation. ... As a review of the Library of
Congress's data base of congressional proceedings in the revolutionary and
early national periods reveals, the thirty uses of 'bear arms' and 'bearing
arms' in bills, statutes, and debates of the Continental, Confederation, and
United States' Congresses between 1774 and 1821 invariably occur in a context
exclusively focused on the army or the militia.[22]

However, this conclusion is disputed and may be due to selection bias, which
arises from the use of a limited selection of government documents that
overwhelmingly refer to matters of military service.[23] Commenting on this
previous research, other historians note:

> Searching more comprehensive collections of English language works published
before 1820 shows that there are a number of uses that ... have nothing to do
with military service ... [and] The common law was in agreement. Edward
Christian's edition of Blackstone's Commentaries that appeared in 1790s
described the rights of Englishmen (which every American colonist had been
promised) in these terms 'everyone is at liberty to keep or carry a gun, if he
does not use it for the [unlawful] destruction of game.' This right was
separate from militia duties.[23]

The Oxford English Dictionary defines the term _to bear arms_ as: _"to serve
as a soldier, do military service, fight,"_ dating to about 1330.

Garry Wills, author and history professor at Northwestern University, has
written of the origin of the term _bear arms_ :

> By legal and other channels, the Latin " _arma ferre_ " entered deeply into
the European language of war. Bearing arms is such a synonym for waging war
that Shakespeare can call a just war " _'justborne arms_ " and a civil war "
_self-borne arms_." Even outside the special phrase " _bear arms_ ," much of
the noun's use echoes Latin phrases: to be under arms ( _sub armis_ ), the
call to arms ( _ad arma_ ), to follow arms ( _armasequi_ ), to take arms (
_armacapere_ ), to lay down arms ( _arma pÅ“nere_ ). "Arms" is a profession
that one brother chooses the way another choose law or the church. An issue
undergoes the arbitrament of arms."..."One does not bear arms against a rabbit
...".[24]

Garry Wills also cites Greek and Latin etymology:

> ..."Bear Arms" refers to military service, which is why the plural is used
(based on Greek 'hopla pherein' and Latin 'arma ferre') â€“ one does not bear
arm, or bear an arm. The word means, etymologically, 'equipment' (from the
root ar-* in verbs like 'ararisko', to fit out). It refers to the 'equipage'
of war. Thus 'bear arms' can be used of naval as well as artillery warfare,
since the "profession of arms" refers to all military callings.[25]

Historically, the right to keep and bear arms, whether considered an
individual or a collective or a militia right, did not originate fully formed
in the Bill of Rights in 1791; rather, the Second Amendment was the
codification of the six-centuries-old responsibility to keep and bear arms for
king and country that was inherited from the English Colonists that settled
North America, tracing its origin back to the Assize of Arms of 1181 that
occurred during the reign of Henry II. Through being codified in the United
States Constitution, the common law right was continued and guaranteed for the
People, and statutory law enacted subsequently by Congress cannot extinguish
the pre-existing common law right to keep and bear arms.[26]

The Second Amendment to the United States Constitution refers to a pre-
existing right to keep and bear arms:

> A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State,
the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.[27]

The right is often presented in the United States as being an unenumerated,
pre-existing right, such as provided for by the Ninth Amendment to the United
States Constitution,[26] interpreted by some as providing for unenumerated
rights, and therefore implicitly a right to keep and bear arms:

> The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights shall not be
construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.

Some have seen the Second Amendment as derivative of a common law right to
keep and bear arms; Thomas B. McAffee & Michael J. Quinlan, writing in the
North Carolina Law Review said _"... Madison did not invent the right to keep
and bear arms when he drafted the Second Amendment â€“ the right was pre-
existing at both common law and in the early state constitutions."_ [28]

Akhil Reed Amar similarly notes the basis of Common Law for the first ten
amendments of the U.S. Constitution, "following John Randolph Tucker's famous
oral argument in the 1887 Chicago anarchist case, Spies v. Illinois":

> Though originally the first ten Amendments were adopted as limitations on
Federal power, yet insofar as they secure and recognize fundamental rights â€“
common law rights â€“ of the man, they make them privileges and immunities of
the man as citizen of the United States ...[29]

Uviller and Merkel hold that the right to bear arms was not reserved for the
state, but rather was an individual and personal right for arms only to the
extent needed to maintain a well regulated militia to support the state. They
also hold that a militia recognizable to the framers of the Constitution has
ceased to exist in the United States resulting from deliberate Congressional
legislation and also societal neglect; nonetheless, "Technically, all males
aged seventeen to forty-five are members of the unorganized militia, but that
status has no practical legal significance."[30][31]

A few academic writers published their opinions in several works:

> From the text as well as a fair understanding of the contemporary ethic
regarding arms and liberty, it seems to us overwhelmingly evident that the
principal purpose of the Amendment was to secure a personal, individual
entitlement to the possession and use of arms. We cannot, however, (as the
individual rights contingent generally does) disregard entirely the first part
of the text proclaiming a well regulated militia necessary to the security of
a free state.[32]

>

> ... we understand the Second Amendment as though it read: "Inasmuch as and
so long as a well regulated Militia shall be necessary to the security of a
free state and so long as privately held arms shall be essential to the
maintenance thereof, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not
be infringed." "..to us, the language of the Amendment cannot support a right
to personal weaponry independent of the social value of a regulated
organization of armed citizens.[33] [34][35]

## Early commentary in federal courts[edit]

See also: Firearm case law in the United States

In the century following the ratification of the Bill of Rights, the intended
meaning and application of the Second Amendment drew less interest than it
does in modern times.[36] The vast majority of regulation was done by states,
and the first case law on weapons regulation dealt with state interpretations
of the Second Amendment. A notable exception to this general rule was _Houston
v. Moore_ , 18 U.S. 1 (1820), where the Supreme Court mentioned the Second
Amendment in an aside.[37]

### _Dred Scott v. Sandford_ [edit]

In the Nineteenth century considerable attention in public discourse and the
courts was directed to the issue of arming of slaves (prior to the Civil War),
and later to the right of slaves to belong to militia and the arming of these
individuals. Most famously this is seen in the court arguments of the 1857
court case _Dred Scott v. Sandford_ , whether the slave Dred Scott could be a
citizen with rights, including the right to bear arms. This debate about the
rights of slaves and former slaves often included the usage of the term 'bear
arms' with the meaning of individuals having or not having the right to
possess firearms.

In the _Dred Scott_ decision, the opinion of the court stated that if African
Americans were considered U.S. citizens, "It would give to persons of the
negro race, who were recognized as citizens in any one State of the Union, the
right ... to keep and carry arms wherever they went."[38][39]

## Early commentary in state courts[edit]

The Second Amendment of the United States Constitution is a federal provision.
In 2010, this "fundamental" and "individual" right was "fully incorporated"
with the 14th Amendment per the SCOTUS ruling made in _McDonald v. City of
Chicago_ , which upheld the prior opinion made in _District of Columbia v.
Heller_. Each of the fifty states also has its own state constitution. Forty-
four states have chosen to explicitly embody a right to bear arms into their
state constitutions.[40] Each of the state constitutions, state laws, and
state courts addresses the state-based right to bear arms distinctly within
its respective jurisdictions.[41] The degree and the nature of the protection,
prohibition, and regulation at the state level varies from state to state. The
District of Columbia, not being a state, falls within the federal
jurisdiction.

Approximately thirty-one states have explicitly chosen to include the right to
arms for "individual right", "defense of self", "defense of home" or similarly
worded reasons. Approximately thirteen states, as with the U.S. Constitution,
did not choose to explicitly include "individual", "self" or "home" wording
associated with a right to bear arms for their specific states.

Approximately twenty-eight states have explicitly chosen to include the right
to bear arms for "security of a free state", "defense of state", "common
defense" or similarly worded reasons, as with the U.S. Constitution.
Approximately sixteen states did not choose to include explicitly "free
state", "defense of state" or "common defense" wording for their specific
state. Whether the inclusion of these kinds of wording in state constitutions
has relevance to the issue of whether implicit "individual" rights exist, or
whether such rights (if any) are implicitly protected by the states'
constitutions or by the U.S. Constitution's Second Amendment, remains a matter
of dispute. However, since the SCOTUS has "fully incorporated" the 2nd and
14th Amendments in their 2010 opinion and order in _McDonald v. City of
Chicago_ , the right to keep and bear arms is "fully applicable" to the states
and limits the states on any and all regulations and restrictions they choose
to take, and federal Constitutional rights take precedence over state, local
and other laws that regulate to "Right of Lawful Citizens to keep and bear
Arms for self-defense, a 'central component' of the 2nd Amendment" (see
_McDonald v. City of Chicago_ (SC 2010)).

Regarding the state interpretations of these state and the federal
constitutional rights to bear arms, state courts have addressed the meaning of
these specific rights in considerable detail. Two different models have
emerged from state jurisprudence: an individual right (defense of self or
home) and a collective (defense of the state) right. It should be noted,
however, that the states cannot lessen or restrict any Bill of Rights
guarantee that has been "fully incorporated" (American jurisprudence) and that
the right that is "fully incorporated" also applies to the respective State
Constitutions; again, the states can only "add to" these rights but can never
"diminish" these rights by state and local laws.

### Bliss[edit]

_Bliss v. Commonwealth_ (1822, KY)[42] addressed the right to bear arms
pursuant to Art. 10, Sec. 23 of the Second Constitution of Kentucky
(1799):[43] "That the rights of the citizens to bear arms in defense of
themselves and the State shall not be questioned." This was interpreted to
include the right to carry a concealed sword in a cane. This case has been
described as about "a statute prohibiting the carrying of concealed weapons
[that] was violative of the Second Amendment."[44] Others, however, have seen
no conflict with the Second Amendment by the Commonwealth of Kentucky's
statute under consideration in _Bliss_ since "The Kentucky law was aimed at
concealed weapons. No one saw any conflict with the Second Amendment. As a
matter of fact, most of the few people who considered the question at all
believed amendments to the U.S. Constitution did not apply to state laws."[45]

The Kentucky High Court stated in _Bliss_ , "But it should not be forgotten,
that it is not only a part of the right that is secured by the constitution;
it is the right entire and complete, as it existed at the adoption of the
constitution; and if any portion of that right be impaired, immaterial how
small the part may be, and immaterial the order of time at which it be done,
it is equally forbidden by the constitution."[42] The "constitution" mentioned
in this quote refers to Kentucky's Constitution.[16]

The case prompted outrage in the Kentucky House, all the while recognizing
that Section 23 of the Second Constitution of Kentucky (1799) did guarantee
individuals the right to bear arms. The _Bliss_ ruling, to the extent that it
dealt with concealed weapons, was overturned by constitutional amendment with
Section 26 in Kentucky's Third Constitution (1850) banning the future carrying
of concealed weapons, while still asserting that the bearing of arms in
defense of themselves and the state was an individual and collective right in
the Commonwealth of Kentucky. This recognition has remained to the present day
in the Commonwealth of Kentucky's Fourth Constitution, enacted in 1891, in
Section 1, Article 7, that guarantees "The right to bear arms in defense of
themselves and of the State, subject to the power of the General Assembly to
enact laws to prevent persons from carrying concealed weapons." As noted in
the Northern Kentucky Law Review Second Amendment Symposium: Rights in
Conflict in the 1980s, vol. 10, no. 1, 1982, p. 155, "The first state court
decision resulting from the "right to bear arms" issue was _Bliss v.
Commonwealth_. The court held that "the right of citizens to bear arms in
defense of themselves and the State must be preserved entire, ..." "This
holding was unique because it stated that the right to bear arms is absolute
and unqualified."[46][47]

The importance of _Bliss_ is also seen from the defense subsequently given
against a murder charge in Kentucky against Mattews Ward, who in 1852 pulled
out a concealed pistol and fatally wounded his brother's teacher over an
accusation regarding eating chestnuts in class. Ward's defense team consisted
of eighteen lawyers, including U.S. Senator John Crittenden, former Governor
of Kentucky, and former United States Attorney General. The defense
successfully defended Ward in 1854 through an assertion that "a man has a
right to carry arms; I am aware of nothing in the laws of God or man,
prohibiting it. The Constitution of Kentucky and our Bill of Rights guarantee
it. The Legislature once passed an act forbidding it, but it was decided
unconstitutional, and overruled by our highest tribunal, the Court of
Appeals." As noted by Cornell, "Ward's lawyers took advantage of the doctrine
advanced in _Bliss_ and wrapped their client's action under the banner of a
constitutional right to bear arms. Ward was acquitted."[48]

### Aymette[edit]

In _Aymette v. State_ , 21 Tenn. 154, 156 (1840), the Tennessee Supreme Court
construed the guarantee in Tennessee's 1834 Constitution that 'the free white
men of this State have a right to Keep and bear arms for their common
defence.'[49] Explaining that the provision was adopted with the same goals as
the Federal Constitution's Second Amendment, the court wrote: "The words 'bear
arms' ... have reference to their military use, and were not employed to mean
wearing them about the person as part of the dress. As the object for which
the right to keep and bear arms is secured, is of general and public nature,
to be exercised by the people in a body, for their common defense, so the
arms, the right to keep which is secured, are such as are usually employed in
civilized warfare, and that constitute the ordinary military equipment."

  *     1. The act of 1837-8, ch. 137, sec. 2, which prohibits any person from wearing any Bowie knife, or Arkansas toothpick, or other knife or weapon in form, shape or size resembling a Bowie knife or Arkansas toothpick under his clothes, or concealed about his person, does not conflict with the 26th section of the first article of the bill of rights, securing to the free white citizens the right to keep and bear arms for their common defense.
  *     1. The arms, the right to keep and bear which is secured by the constitution, are such as are usually employed in civilized warfare, and constitute the ordinary military equipment; the legislature have the power to prohibit the keeping or wearing weapons dangerous to the peace and safety of the citizens, and which are not usual in civilized warfare.
  *     1. The right to keep and bear arms for the common defense, is a great political right. It respects the citizens on the one hand, and the rulers on the other; and although this right must be inviolably preserved, it does not follow that the legislature is prohibited from passing laws regulating the manner in which these arms may be employed.

### Nunn[edit]

The Georgia Supreme Court ruled in _Nunn v. Georgia_ (Nunn v. State, 1 Ga. (1
Kel.) 243 (1846)) that a state law banning handguns was an unconstitutional
violation of the Second Amendment. This was the first gun control measure to
be overturned on Second Amendment grounds.[50] The Supreme Court in its ruling
in _District of Columbia v. Heller_ said _Nunn_ "perfectly captured the way in
which the operative clause of the Second Amendment furthers the purpose
announced in the prefatory clause."[51]

> The right of the whole people, old and young, men, women and boys, and not
militia only, to keep and bear _arms_ of every description, and not _such_
merely as are used by the _militia_ , shall not be _infringed_ , curtailed, or
broken in upon, in the smallest degree; and all this for the important end to
be attained: the rearing up and qualifying a well-regulated militia, so
vitally necessary to the security of a free State. Our opinion is, that any
law, State or Federal, is repugnant to the Constitution, and void, which
contravenes this _right_ , originally belonging to our forefathers, trampled
under foot by Charles I. and his two wicked sons and successors, re-
established by the revolution of 1688, conveyed to this land of liberty by the
colonists, and finally incorporated conspicuously in our own Magna Charta![52]

### Buzzard[edit]

In _State v. Buzzard_ (1842, Ark), the Arkansas high court adopted a militia-
based, political interpretation, reading of the right to bear arms under state
law, and upheld the 21st section of the second article of the Arkansas
Constitution that declared, "that the free white men of this State shall have
a right to keep and bear arms for their common defense",[53] while rejecting a
challenge to a statute prohibiting the carrying of concealed weapons. Buzzard
had carried a concealed weapon and stood "indicted by virtue of the authority
of the 13th section of an act of the Legislature prohibiting any person
wearing a pistol, dirk, large knife or sword-cane _concealed as a weapon_ ,
unless upon a journey, under the penalties of fine and imprisonment." Justice
Lacy, in a dissenting opinion in _Buzzard_ , summarizing the majority
viewpoint to which he disagreed, declared:

> That the words "a well regulated militia being necessary for the security of
a free State", and the words "common defense" clearly show the true intent and
meaning of these Constitutions [i.e., Ark. and U.S.] and prove that it is a
political and not an individual right, and, of course, that the State, in her
legislative capacity, has the right to regulate and control it: This being the
case, then the people, neither individually nor collectively, have the right
to keep and bear arms."[53]

Joel Prentiss Bishop's influential _Commentaries on the Law of Statutory
Crimes_ (1873) took Buzzard's militia-based interpretation, a view that Bishop
characterized as the "Arkansas doctrine", as the orthodox view of the right to
bear arms in American law.[53][54]

Political scientist Earl Kruschke has categorized both _Bliss_ and _Buzzard_
as being "cases illustrating the individual view."[55] Professor Eugene Volokh
revealed, in the California Political Review, that a statement in a concurring
opinion in _Buzzard_ was the only support for a collective right view of the
right to keep and bear arms in the 19th century.[56]

### _Salina v. Blaksley_ [edit]

In 1905, the Kansas Supreme Court in _Salina v. Blaksley_ [57] made the first
collective right judicial interpretation.[58] The Kansas high court declared:
"That the provision in question applies only to the right to bear arms as a
member of the state militia, or some other military organization provided for
by law, is also apparent from the second amendment to the federal
Constitution, which says: 'A well regulated militia, being necessary to the
security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall
not be infringed.'"

## Modern commentary[edit]

### Interpretive Models[edit]

Further information: Second Amendment to the United States Constitution and
Ninth Amendment to the United States Constitution

Three models of interpreting the right to bear arms in the United States
commonly exist. These three models are founded on differing interpretations of
the Second Amendment, _"A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the
security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall
not be infringed."_

The first model, the individual-rights model, holds that a right of
individuals is to own and possess firearms, much as the First Amendment
protects a right of individuals to engage in free speech.[59] This view was
confirmed by the Supreme Court in _District of Columbia v. Heller_ (2008) than
had previous interpretations by the Court. Prior to the Supreme Court's ruling
in _Heller_ there was a split among the federal courts, with nine of the
federal circuit courts of appeal supporting a modified collective rights view,
two of the federal circuits supporting an individual rights view, and one
federal circuit court having not addressed the question.[60]

The second two models focus on the preamble, or "purpose" clause, of the
Amendment â€“ the words _"A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the
security of a free State."_ The second model, the collective model, holds that
the right to bear arms belongs to the people collectively rather than to
individuals, under the belief that the right's only purpose is to enable
states to maintain a militia.

The third model, the modified collective model, holds that the right to keep
and bear arms exists only for individuals actively serving in the militia, and
then only pursuant to such regulations as may be prescribed.[59]

### Federal case commentary[edit]

Supreme Court justice Antonin Scalia in 2008 wrote that the right to bear arms
is not unlimited and is subject to reasonable prohibitions and regulations and
subsequently federal court rulings have upheld existing gun prohibitions and
regulations.[61]

Nadine Strossen, former president of the American Civil Liberties Union, has
stated that the individual rights model must yield to reasonable
regulation.[62] Strossen said "it is no more absolute than freedom of speech
or any other right in the Constitution. No right is absolute; the government
is always allowed to restrict the right if it can satisfy Constitutional
strict scrutiny and show the restriction is narrowly tailored to promote a
goal of compelling importance."[63]

In October 2001, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
stated:

> there are numerous instances of the phrase 'bear arms' being used to
describe a civilian's carrying of arms. Early constitutional provisions or
declarations of rights in at least some ten different states speak of the
right of the 'people' [or 'citizen' or 'citizens'] "to bear arms in defense of
themselves [or 'himself'] and the state,' or equivalent words, thus
indisputably reflecting that under common usage 'bear arms' was in no sense
restricted to bearing arms in military service."[64][65]

#### _United States v. Miller_ [edit]

Main article: United States v. Miller

In _United States v. Miller_ , 307 U.S. 174 (1939), the Supreme Court rejected
a Second Amendment challenge to the National Firearms Act prohibiting the
interstate transportation of unregistered Title II weapons:

> Jack Miller and Frank Layton "did unlawfully ... transport in interstate
commerce from ... Claremore ... Oklahoma to ... Siloam Springs ... Arkansas a
certain firearm ... a double barrel ... shotgun having a barrel less than 18
inches in length ... at the time of so transporting said firearm in interstate
commerce ... not having registered said firearm as required by Section 1132d
of Title 26, United States Code, ... and not having in their possession a
stamp-affixed written order ... as provided by Section 1132C ...[66]

In a unanimous opinion authored by Justice McReynolds, the Supreme Court
stated "the objection that the Act usurps police power reserved to the States
is plainly untenable."[67] As the Court explained:

> In the absence of any evidence tending to show that possession or use of a
'shotgun having a barrel of less than eighteen inches in length' at this time
has some reasonable relationship to any preservation or efficiency of a well
regulated militia, we cannot say that the Second Amendment guarantees the
right to keep and bear such an instrument. Certainly it is not within judicial
notice that this weapon is any part of the ordinary military equipment or that
its use could contribute to the common defense.[68]

Gun rights advocates claim that the Court in _Miller_ ruled that the Second
Amendment protected the right to keep arms that are part of "ordinary military
equipment."[69] They also claim that the Court did not consider the question
of whether the sawed-off shotgun in the case would be an applicable weapon for
personal defense, instead looking solely at the weapon's suitability for the
"common defense."[70] Law professor Andrew McClurg states, "The only certainty
about _Miller_ is that it failed to give either side a clear-cut victory. Most
modern scholars recognize this fact."[71]

#### _District of Columbia v. Heller_ [edit]

Main article: District of Columbia v. Heller

According to the syllabus prepared by the U.S. Supreme Court Reporter of
Decisions,[72] in _District of Columbia v. Heller_ , 554 U.S. 570 (2008), the
Supreme Court held[72][73] that the Second Amendment protects an individual
right to possess a firearm unconnected with service in a militia, and to use
that arm for traditionally lawful purposes, such as self-defense within the
home. pp. 2â€“53.[72][73]

Other legal summaries of the court's findings in this case are
similar.[74][75][76][77][78][79]

#### _McDonald v. Chicago_ [edit]

Main article: McDonald v. Chicago

On June 28, 2010, the Supreme Court in _McDonald v. Chicago_ , 561 U.S. 3025
(2010) held that the Second Amendment was fully incorporated within the 14th
Amendment. This means that the court ruled that the Second Amendment limits
state and local governments to the same extent that it limits the federal
government.[80] It also remanded a case regarding a Chicago handgun
prohibition. Four of the five Justices in the majority voted to do so by way
of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, while the fifth
Justice, Clarence Thomas, voted to do so through the amendment's Privileges or
Immunities Clause.[81]

## The politics of the right to keep and bear arms[edit]

Main article: Gun politics in the United States

Interest groups, primarily in the United States, exert political pressure for
and against legislation limiting the right to keep and bear arms. This
political debate in America is organized between those who seek stricter
regulations and those who believe gun regulations violate the Second Amendment
protection of a right to keep and bear arms.[82] The largest advocacy group in
this regard is the National Rifle Association, and its political wing, the NRA
Institute for Legislative Action. The NRA has been described as one of the
largest and most powerful political special interest groups in the United
States.[83] Several other groups including the Gun Owners of America and the
Citizens Committee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms, while smaller in size,
are also politically active.[84] The main gun control advocacy group is the
Brady Campaign which has been described as considerably less effective than
gun-rights organizations.[85]

## See also[edit]

  * American gun ownership
  * Gun politics
  * Allowed weapon types per state
  * Overview of gun laws by nation
  * Right of self-defense
  * Index of gun politics articles
  * 2nd Amendment Day

## References[edit]

  1. **^** "Supreme Court affirms fundamental right to bear arms".
  2. **^** "Justices Extend Firearm Rights in 5-to-4 Ruling". _The New York Times_. 29 June 2010.
  3. **^** "Second Amendment". _LII / Legal Information Institute_.
  4. **^** Volokh, Eugene. "State Constitutional Rights to Keep and Bear Arms". UCLA Law School. Retrieved 2013-11-30.
  5. **^** "Second Amendment". _LII / Legal Information Institute_.
  6. **^** Young, David E., The Founders' View of the Right to Bear Arms, p. 222.
  7. **^** McAffee, Thomas B.; Quinlan, Michael J. (1997). "Bringing Forward The Right To Keep And Bear Arms: Do Text, History, or Precedent Stand In The Way?". _Scholarly Works_. Paper 512.
  8. **^** "1688 c.2 1 Will. and Mar. Sess. 2". Statutelaw.gov.uk. Retrieved August 30, 2010.
  9. **^** "Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England". Avalon.law.yale.edu. Retrieved 2012-05-22.
  10. **^** Halbrook, Stephen P. (1994). _That Every Man Be Armed: The Evolution of a Constitutional Right (Independent Studies in Political Economy)_. Oakland, CA: The Independent Institute. p. 8. ISBN 0-945999-38-0.
  11. **^** Schmidt, Christopher (February 2007). "An International Human Right to Keep and Bear Arms". _William & Mary Bill of Rights Journal_. Williamsburg, Virginia: The College of William & Mary School of Law. **15** (3): 983.
  12. **^** Kates, Jr., Don B. (November 1983). "Handgun Prohibition and the Original Meaning of the Second Amendment". _Michigan Law Review_. The Michigan Law Review Association. **82** (2): 204â€“273. doi:10.2307/1288537. JSTOR 1288537. " In unmistakable individual right terms: As civil rulers, not having their duty to the people duly before them, may attempt to tyrannize, and as the military forces which must be occasionally raised to defend our country, might pervert their power to the injury of their fellow citizens, the people are confirmed by the next article in their right to keep and bear _their private arms_. (Emphasis in original)"
  13. **^** Blodgett-Ford, Sayoko (Fall 1995). "The Changing Meaning of the Right to Bear Arms". _Seton Hall Constitutional Law Journal_ : 101.
  14. **^** Merkel, William G.; Uviller, H. Richard (2002). "Ch. 9". _The militia and the right to arms, or, How the second amendment fell silent_. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press. pp. 212â€“225. ISBN 0-8223-3017-2.
  15. **^** "United States v. Emerson, No. 99-10331., October 16, 2001 â€“ US 5th Circuit | FindLaw". FindLaw. Retrieved 23 June 2017.
  16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Right to Keep and Bear Arms, U.S. Senate. 2001 Paladin Press. ISBN 1-58160-254-5.
  17. **^** _Heller_ , Syllabus, item #1
  18. **^** Uviller, H. Richard.  & Merkel, William G.: _The Militia and the Right to Arms, Or, How the second Amendment Fell Silent_ , pp 23, 194. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3017-2
  19. **^** Pepper, John; Petrie, Carol; Wellford, Charles F.: _Firearms and violence_ , p. 290. National Academies Press, 2004. ISBN 0-309-09124-1
  20. **^** Wills, Garry. _To Keep and Bear Arms_. New York Review Of Books, September 21, 1995.
  21. **^** Williams, David H. (2003). _The mythic meanings of the Second Amendment: taming political violence in a constitutional republic_. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press. p. 5. ISBN 0-300-09562-7. "The amendment thus guarantees a right to arms only within the context of a militia, not an individual right to arms for self-defense or hunting."
  22. **^** Uviller, H. Richard.  & Merkel, William G.: _The Militia and the Right to Arms, Or, How the Second Amendment Fell Silent_ , p. 194. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3017-2
  23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cramer, Clayton E.; Olson, Joseph (2008). "What Did "Bear Arms" Mean in the Second Amendment?". _Georgetown Journal of Law & Public Policy_. **6** (2).
  24. **^** Wills, Garry (2002). _A Necessary Evil: A History of American Distrust of Government_. New York: Simon  & Schuster. p. 257. ISBN 0-684-87026-6.
  25. **^** Wills, Garry (1999). _A Necessary Evil_ pp. 256â€“257. New York, NY. Simon  & Schuster.
  26. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Espohl, Frank (1997). "The Right to Carry Concealed Weapons for Self Defense". _Southern Illinois University Law Journal_. **22** : 151. Archived from the original on 2013-05-23. "The right of self-preservation, including the right of self-defense, has been suggested to be within the protection of the Ninth Amendment. Thus, although some courts have refused to hold that the Ninth Amendment protects a right to possess firearms, laws which restrict the ability of law-abiding citizens to possess firearms for the purpose of self-defense could be said to violate the Ninth Amendment. Another common interpretation of the Ninth Amendment is that it protects rights which were recognized at common law as being among the "fundamental rights of Englishmen." The common law, as described in Blackstone's Commentaries, has been carried into American jurisprudence. One such right protected at common law was the right to self-defense and the right to possess and carry weapons for defensive purposes. Hobbes described the right to self-defense as a fundamental natural right of which persons can not justly be deprived by any law or covenant. Blackstone listed self-defense and the right to carry weapons for self-defense as one of the fundamental rights of Englishmen. Blackstone further described the right to self-defense as "the primary law of nature, so it is not, nor can it be in fact, taken away by the law of society"
  27. **^** "Bill of Rights Transcript Text". _archives.gov_. 2011. Retrieved 15 December 2011.
  28. **^** McAffee, Thomas B.; Michael J. Quinlan (March 1997). "Bringing Forward The Right To Keep And Bear Arms: Do Text, History, Or Precedent Stand In The Way?". _North Carolina Law Review_ : 781.
  29. **^** Amar, Akhil (April 1992). "The Bill Of Rights And The Fourteenth Amendment". _Yale Law Journal_ : 1193.
  30. **^** Merkel, William G.; Uviller, H. Richard (2002). "Ch. 7". _The militia and the right to arms, or, How the second amendment fell silent_. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press. 151â€“152. ISBN 0-8223-3017-2. "Given the continued vitality of the social role of armed troops, has the institution of the militia evolved into a viable military force in America today? Medieval monks might enjoy the question: is a military force that developed out of an ancient construct known as "the militia" still a militia though it boasts none of the defining characteristics of that form of military organization, and is, actually, in character the contradiction of many of them? It's a little like the parable of Aristotle's knife: if I break the blade of my knife and replace it, and then put a new handle on it, is it still the same knife?"
  31. **^** Williams, David H. (2003). _The mythic meanings of the Second Amendment: taming political violence in a constitutional republic_. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press. p. 78. ISBN 0-300-09562-7. "Technically, all males aged seventeen to forty-five are members of the unorganized militia, but that status has no practical legal significance. Such "militia members" are not required to own guns, to drill together, or to learn virtue. The statutory provision creating this "universal militia" is nothing more than a dim memory of a distant hope."
  32. **^** Uviller, H. Richard.  & Merkel, William G.: _The Militia and the Right to Arms, Or, How the Second Amendment Fell Silent_ , p. 23. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3017-2
  33. **^** Uviller, H. Richard.  & Merkel, William G.: _The Militia and the Right to Arms, Or, How the Second Amendment Fell Silent_ , p. 24. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3017-2
  34. **^** Brady, Sarah (2002). _A Good Fight_. Public Affairs. ISBN 1-58648-105-3.
  35. **^** Spitzer, Robert J. (2003). _The Second Amendment "Right to Bear Arms" and United States v. Emerson_. 77 St. John's L. Rev.
  36. **^** Cornell, _Gun Control_ , p. 6. Neither of the two modern theories that have defined public debate over the right to bear arms is faithful to the original understanding of this provision of the Bill of Rights.
  37. **^** Justice Story "misidentified" it as the "5th Amendment. Several public officials, including James Madison and Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story, retained the confusing practice of referring to each of the ten amendments in the Bill of Rights by the enumeration found in the first draft; the fifth article is the Second Amendment.
  38. **^** "FindLaw | Cases and Codes". _Caselaw.lp.findlaw.com_. Retrieved 2013-07-05.
  39. **^** 60 U.S. 393, 417 (1857).
  40. **^** Volokh, Eugene (2006). "State Constitutional Right to Keep and Bear Arms Provisions". UCLA. Retrieved 2008-05-10.
  41. **^** Cooley, Thomas M.  & Angell, Alexis C.: _A Treatise on the Constitutional Limitations which Rest Upon the Legislative Power of the States of the American Union_ , p. 427. Boston: Little, Brown  & Company. 1890.
  42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Bliss v. Commonwealth_ , 2 Littell 90 (KY 1882). 
  43. **^** "Kentucky's Second Constitution (1799)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 9, 2010. Retrieved 2012-05-22.
  44. **^** United States. Anti-Crime Program. Hearings Before Ninetieth Congress, First Session. Washington: U.S. Government Print. Off, 1967, p. 246. quote: _"...all citizens had the unabridgable right to bear arms for self-protection as well as for militia purposes and that a statute prohibiting the carrying of concealed weapons was violative of the Second Amendment (see Bliss v. Commonwealth, 2 Litt. (Ky) 90, 13 Am. December 251 (1822)) ..._
  45. **^** Weir, William (1997). _A Well regulated militia: the battle over gun control_. North Haven, CT: Archon Books. pp. 35â€“36. ISBN 0-208-02423-9.
  46. **^** Pierce, Darell R. (1982). "Second Amendment Survey". _Northern Kentucky Law Review Second Amendment Symposium: Rights in Conflict in 1980s_. **10** (1): 155.
  47. **^** Two states, Alaska and Vermont, do not require a permit or license for carrying a concealed weapon to this day, following Kentucky's original position.
  48. **^** Cornell, Saul (2006). _A Well-Regulated Militia â€“ The Founding Fathers and the Origins of Gun Control in America_. New York City: Oxford University Press. pp. 147â€“149. ISBN 978-0-19-514786-5.
  49. **^** "Tennessee Constitution, 1834". Retrieved 2018-02-14.
  50. **^** Ph.D., Gregg Lee Carter; Carter, Gregg Lee (2012). _Guns in American Society_. ABC-CLIO. pp. 647â€“. ISBN 9780313386701. Retrieved 9 March 2013.
  51. **^** Ph.D., Gregg Lee Carter (2012). _Guns in American Society_. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9780313386718. Retrieved 19 March 2013.
  52. **^** "District of Columbia v. Heller" (PDF). Retrieved 2018-02-14.
  53. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _State v. Buzzard_ , 4 Ark. (2 Pike) 18 (1842). 
  54. **^** Cornell, Saul (2006). _A Well-Regulated Militia â€“ The Founding Fathers and the Origins of Gun Control in America_. New York City: Oxford University Press. p. 188. ISBN 978-0-19-514786-5. "Dillon endorsed Bishop's view that _Buzzard's_ "Arkansas doctrine," not the libertarian views exhibited in _Bliss, captured the dominant strain of American legal thinking on this question._ " __
  55. **^** Kruschke, Earl R. (1995). _Gun control: a reference handbook_. Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO. pp. 140â€“143. ISBN 0-87436-695-X.
  56. **^** Volokh, Eugene (Novemberâ€“December 1988). "Testimony of Eugene Volokh on the Second Amendment, Senate Subcommittee on the Constitution, September 23, 1998". _California Political Review_ : 23. "A recent exhaustive study reveals that there was exactly one statement in the 1800s cases or commentaries supporting the collective rights view, a concurring opinion in an 1842 Arkansas state court case."
  57. **^** _City of Salina v. Blaksley_ , 72 Kan. 230 (1905). 
  58. **^** Cornell, Saul (2006). _A Well-Regulated Militia â€“ The Founding Fathers and the Origins of Gun Control in America_. New York City: Oxford University Press. p. 258. ISBN 978-0-19-514786-5. "... the Kansas Supreme Court had used a similar formulation of the right to bear arms a decade earlier, describing this right as one that "refers to the people as a collective body."
  59. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Dorf, Michael (October 31, 2001). "Federal Court of Appeals Says the Second Amendment Places Limits on Gun Control Legislation". Findlaw-Writ. Retrieved 2008-03-31.
  60. **^** Liptak, Adam (May 6, 2007). "A Liberal Case for Gun Rights Sways Judiciary". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 2008-03-31.
  61. **^** >"The Volokh Conspiracy â€“ Yet Another Early Post- _Heller_ Second Amendment Case:". Retrieved 2009-02-21.
  62. **^** Amar, Akhil; Vikram Amar (November 2, 2001). "Guns and the Constitution: Telling The Right Second Amendment Story". Findlaw-Writ. Retrieved 2008-03-31.
  63. **^** Interview with Nadine Strossen, David Shankbone, _Wikinews_ , October 30, 2007.
  64. **^** United States v. Emerson, 270 F.3d 203 (5th Cir. 2001).
  65. **^** The cited excerpt from the _Emerson_ decision reflects some of the court's lengthy analysis of Second Amendment jurisprudence (Spitzer 2003)(Reynolds 2002). This analysis garnered considerable attention and scrutiny by legal experts. Shortly after the decision, Attorney General John Ashcroft directed the adoption of the Emerson court's view as the policy of the Justice Department in a memo to all ninety-three United States Attorneys in November 2001. In contrast, legal critics of the "individualist view" repudiated the _Emerson_ analysis on various grounds. Judge Robert M. Parker, while concurring in the _Emerson_ result, labeled the majority's analysis as _obiter dicta_ , irrelevant to the outcome of the case (see _Emerson_ , Spitzer 2003). Moreover, the thoroughness of the _Emerson_ analysis was criticized because the court's rendered opinion relied substantially on interpretations submitted in a "brief presented by one party" (Spitzer 2003).
  66. **^** _Miller_ , at 175.
  67. **^** _Miller_ , at 177â€“178.
  68. **^** _Miller_ , at 178.
  69. **^** Fezell, Howard J. "The misconstruction of United States v. Miller". Archived from the original on December 22, 2008. Retrieved January 5, 2009.
  70. **^** Paul Helmke (March 28, 2008). "One Court's Second Amendment Fantasy". _Huffington Post_. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
  71. **^** McClurg, p. 139. "But when all is said and done, the only certainty about _Miller_ is that it failed to give either side a clear-cut victory. Most modern scholars recognize this fact. For example, Professor Eugene Volokh describes Miller as 'deliciously and usefully ambiguous' in an article about using the Second Amendment as a teaching tool in constitutional law. That is probably the most accurate statement that can be made about the case."
  72. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "District of Columbia v. Heller (No. 07-290)". _Legal Information Institute_. Cornell University Law School. Retrieved December 26, 2012.
  73. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Cornell School of Law Summary of the _Heller_ Decision". Law.cornell.edu. Retrieved September 1, 2012.
  74. **^** "Witkin Legal Institute Summary of the _Heller_ Decision". Witkin.com. June 30, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2012.
  75. **^** "Nathan Moore Summary of the Heller Decision". Mooredefenselaw.com. June 30, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2012.
  76. **^** "Global Legal Information Network Summary of the _Heller_ Decision". Glin.gov. Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. Retrieved September 1, 2012.
  77. **^** Veronica Rose; Principal Analyst. "OLR Research Institute's Summary of the Heller Decision". Cga.ct.gov. Retrieved September 1, 2012.
  78. **^** "Oyez Summary of the _Heller_ Decision". Oyez.org. Retrieved December 26, 2012.
  79. **^** " "Legal Community Against Violence" Summary of the _Heller_ Decision" (PDF). Lcav.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 13, 2012. Retrieved September 1, 2012.
  80. **^** Liptak, Adam (June 28, 2010). "Justices Extend Firearm Rights in 5-to-4 Ruling". _The New York Times_. Retrieved December 17, 2012.
  81. **^** Scarola, Matthew (June 28, 2010). "Analysis: state gun regulations and McDonald". SCOTUSblog. Retrieved July 3, 2010.
  82. **^** Wilcox, Clyde; Bruce, John W. (1998). _The changing politics of gun control_. Lanham, Md: Rowman  & Littlefield. p. 3. ISBN 0-8476-8614-0.
  83. **^** Carter, Gregg Lee (2002). _Guns in American society: an encyclopedia of history, politics, culture, and the law_. Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO. p. 434. ISBN 1-57607-268-1.
  84. **^** Harry L. Wilson (2007). _Guns, gun control, and elections: the politics and policy of firearms_. Lanham, Md: Rowman  & Littlefield. p. 171. ISBN 0-7425-5347-7.
  85. **^** Warren, Kenneth S. (2008). _Encyclopedia of U.S. Campaigns, Elections, and Electoral Behavior_. Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage Publications, Inc. p. 291. ISBN 1-4129-5489-4.

  86. v

  87. t
  88. e

Lists of countries by laws and law enforcement rankings

* * *

Age of|

  * Consent
  * Legal candidacy for political office
  * Criminal responsibility
  * Legal drinking
  * Legal driving
  * Majority
  * Legal marriage
  * Retirement age
    * Mandatory retirement
  * School-leaving age
  * Legal smoking
  * Voting
    * Suffrage
    * Youth suffrage
  * Working age

Drugs|

  * Alcohol
    * Alcohol consumption
    * Alcohol law
  * Bath salts
    * Legal status of Mephedrone
    * Legal status of MPDV
    * Legal status of Methylone
  * Cannabis
    * Legality
    * annual use
    * lifetime use
  * Cocaine use
    * Legality
  * Methamphetamine
    * Legality
  * LSD
    * Legality
  * Opiate use
  * Salvia divinorum
    * Legality

Death|

  * Legality of euthanasia
  * Homicide
    * by decade
  * Law enforcement killings
  * Legality of suicide
    * Legality of assisted suicide

Guns|

  * Deaths
  * Ownership
  * Laws

Punishment|

  * Corporal punishment
    * At home
    * At school
    * In court
  * Death penalty
  * Incarceration
  * Life imprisonment

Obscenity|

  * Incest
    * Laws
  * Pornography
    * Child pornography
    * Simulated child pornography
    * Drawn pornography depicting minors
    * Internet pornography
  * Prostitution
  * Sexual assault
    * Child sexual abuse
    * Rape
  * Sodomy law
  * Sex trafficking
  * Zoophilia

Reproduction|

  * Abortion law
    * Minors and abortion
  * Adoption law
    * International adoption
  * Human cloning
  * Surrogacy

Censorship|

  * Censorship by country
  * Book censorship
    * by country
  * Film censorship
    * by country
  * Internet censorship
    * by country
  * Cartographic censorship
  * Political censorship
  * Video gaming censorship
    * by country

Human rights|

  * Children's rights
    * Children in the military
  * Intersex rights
  * LGBT rights
  * Slavery
    * Human trafficking

Freedom of movement|

  * by country
    * In the air
  * Abode

Property and  
Environmental|

  * Air
  * Estate
  * Land
  * Minerals
  * Mining
  * Mortgage
  * Water
    * Riparian water

Business|

  * Corporate
    * Corporate liability
  * Competition
    * Mergers and acquisitions
    * Monopoly
  * Legality of bitcoin by country or territory

International  
ownership|

  * International waters
    * Sea law
    * Maritime law
  * Antarctic Treaty System

Other|

  * Animal rights
  * Immigration law
  * National legal systems
  * Police brutality
    * Prisoner abuse
  * Religious law
    * Separation of church and state
    * Sharia
  * Size of police forces
  * World Justice Project

  * List of international rankings

  * List of top international rankings by country
  * Lists by country

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_to_keep_and_bear_arms_in_the_United_States&oldid=896833770"

Categories:

  * Civil rights and liberties
  * Gun politics in the United States
  * Human rights in the United States

Hidden categories:

  * CS1: long volume value
  * Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from June 2016

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

Add links

  * This page was last edited on 13 May 2019, at 04:15 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. WikipediaÂ® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

