
>

>> NASA

>>

>> Global Climate Change

>>

>> Vital Signs of the Planet

>>

>> ![](/assets/logo_nasa_trio_black@2x.png)

>>

>> Skip Navigation

>>

>> ## Feature | February 13, 2018

>>

>> # New study finds sea level rise accelerating

>>

>> ![Global sea level
rise](/system/news_items/main_images/2680_main_image.jpg)

>>

>> Global sea level rise is accelerating incrementally over time rather than
increasing at a steady rate, as previously thought, according to a new study
based on 25 years of NASA and European satellite data. Credit: NASA's Goddard
Space Flight Center/Kathryn Mersmann  
>  › Larger view

>>

>> **By Katie Weeman, Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental
Sciences,  
>  and Patrick Lynch, NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center**

>>

>> The rate of global sea level rise has been accelerating in recent decades,
rather than increasing steadily, according to a new study based on 25 years of
NASA and European satellite data.

>>

>> This acceleration, driven mainly by increased melting in Greenland and
Antarctica, has the potential to double the total sea level rise projected by
2100 when compared to projections that assume a constant rate of sea level
rise, according to lead author Steve Nerem. Nerem is a professor of Aerospace
Engineering Sciences at the University of Colorado Boulder, a fellow at
Colorado's Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences
(CIRES), and a member of NASA's Sea Level Change team.

>>

>> Global sea level rise is accelerating incrementally over time rather than
increasing at a steady rate, as previously thought, according to a new study
based on 25 years of NASA and European satellite data. Credit: NASA's Goddard
Space Flight Center/Kathryn Mersmann. Download more visualizations at NASA's
Scientific Visualization Studio.

>>

>> Global sea level rise is accelerating incrementally over time rather than
increasing at a steady rate, as previously thought, according to a new study
based on 25 years of NASA and European satellite data.

>>

>> If the rate of ocean rise continues to change at this pace, sea level will
rise 26 inches (65 centimeters) by 2100 -- enough to cause significant
problems for coastal cities, according to the new assessment by Nerem and
colleagues from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland; CU
Boulder; the University of South Florida in Tampa; and Old Dominion University
in Norfolk, Virginia. The team, driven to understand and better predict
Earth's response to a warming world, published their work Feb. 12 in the
journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

>>

>> "This is almost certainly a conservative estimate," Nerem said. "Our
extrapolation assumes that sea level continues to change in the future as it
has over the last 25 years. Given the large changes we are seeing in the ice
sheets today, that's not likely."

>>

>> Rising concentrations of greenhouse gases in Earth's atmosphere increase
the temperature of air and water, which causes sea level to rise in two ways.
First, warmer water expands, and this "thermal expansion" of the ocean has
contributed about half of the 2.8 inches (7 centimeters) of global mean sea
level rise we've seen over the last 25 years, Nerem said. Second, melting land
ice flows into the ocean, also increasing sea level across the globe.

>>

>> These increases were measured using satellite altimeter measurements since
1992, including the Topex/Poseidon, Jason-1, Jason-2 and Jason-3 satellite
missions, which have been jointly managed by multiple agencies, including
NASA, Centre national d'etudes spatiales (CNES), European Organisation for the
Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT), and the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in
Pasadena, California, manages the U.S. portion of these missions for NASA's
Science Mission Directorate. The rate of sea level rise in the satellite era
has risen from about 0.1 inch (2.5 millimeters) per year in the 1990s to about
0.13 inches (3.4 millimeters) per year today.

>>

>> "The Topex/Poseidon/Jason altimetry missions have been essentially
providing the equivalent of a global network of nearly half a million accurate
tide gauges, providing sea surface height information every 10 days for over
25 years," said Brian Beckley, of NASA Goddard, second author on the new paper
and lead of a team that processes altimetry observations into a global sea
level data record. "As this climate data record approaches three decades, the
fingerprints of Greenland and Antarctic land-based ice loss are now being
revealed in the global and regional mean sea level estimates."

>>

>> Even with a 25-year data record, detecting acceleration is challenging.
Episodes like volcanic eruptions can create variability: the eruption of Mount
Pinatubo in 1991 decreased global mean sea level just before the
Topex/Poseidon satellite launch, for example. In addition, global sea level
can fluctuate due to climate patterns such as El Ninos and La Ninos (the
opposing phases of the El Nino-Southern Oscillation), which influence ocean
temperature and global precipitation patterns.

>>

>> Nerem and his team used climate models to account for the volcanic effects
and other datasets to determine the El Nino/La Nina effects, ultimately
uncovering the underlying rate and acceleration of sea level rise over the
last quarter century.

>>

>> The team also used tide gauge data to assess potential errors in the
altimeter estimate.

>>

>> "The tide gauge measurements are essential for determining the uncertainty
in the global mean sea level acceleration estimate," said co-author Gary
Mitchum, University of South Florida College of Marine Science. "They provide
the only assessments of the satellite instruments from the ground." Others
have used tide gauge data to measure sea level acceleration, but scientists
have struggled to pull out other important details from tide-gauge data, such
as changes in the last couple of decades due to more active ice sheet melt.

>>

>> In addition to NASA's involvement in missions that make direct sea level
observations from space, the agency's Earth science work includes a wide-
ranging portfolio of missions, field campaigns and research that contribute to
improved understanding of how global sea level is changing. Airborne campaigns
such as Operation IceBridge and JPL's Oceans Melting Greenland gather
measurements of ice sheets and glaciers, while computer modeling research
improves our understanding of how Antarctica and Greenland will respond in a
warming climate.

>>

>> In 2018, NASA will launch two new satellite missions that will be critical
to improving future sea level projections: the Gravity Recovery and Climate
Experiment Follow-On (GRACE-FO) mission, a partnership with
GeoForschungsZentrum (GFZ) in Germany, will continue measurements of the mass
of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets; while the Ice, Cloud, and land
Elevation Satellite-2 (ICESat-2) will make highly accurate observations of the
elevation of ice sheets and glaciers.

>>

>> # Related Stories

>>  
>>                 >>                       * More than a trillion new
measurements of Earth’s height –

>>  
>>

>> blanketing everything from glaciers in Greenland, to mangrove forests in
Florida, to sea ice surrounding Antarctica – are now available to the public.

>>

>> ![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

>>

>> ![First ICESat-2 Global Data Released: Ice, Forests and

More](/system/news_items/list_view_images/2877_traverse-320x240.jpg)

>>

>> May 28, 2019

>>

>> First ICESat-2 Global Data Released: Ice, Forests and More

>>  
>>                 >>                       * A new assessment reveals that
NASA’s estimate of Earth's long-

>>  
>>

>> term temperature rise in recent decades is accurate to within less than a
tenth of a degree Fahrenheit, providing confidence that past and future
research is correctly capturing rising surface temperatures.

>>

>> ![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

>>

>> ![New Studies Increase Confidence in NASA's Measure of Earth's

Temperature](/system/news_items/list_view_images/2876_Viz_large-320x240.gif)

>>

>> May 23, 2019

>>

>> New Studies Increase Confidence in NASA's Measure of Earth's Temperature

>>  
>>                 >>                       * A major ocean current connecting
the Pacific and Indian oceans

>>  
>>

>> slows dramatically during the northwest Asian monsoon season. Now,
scientists have figured out why.

>>

>> ![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

>>

>> ![Seasonal Monsoon Rains Block Key Ocean

Current](/system/news_items/list_view_images/2874_currents-16_320x240.jpg)

>>

>> May 17, 2019

>>

>> Seasonal Monsoon Rains Block Key Ocean Current

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Human-generated greenhouse gases
and atmospheric particles were

>>  
>>

>> affecting global drought risk as far back as the early 20th century,
according to a study from NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS).

>>

>> ![More](/assets/overlay-arrow.png)

>>

>> ![NASA Study: Human Influence on Global Droughts Goes Back 100

Years](/system/news_items/list_view_images/2872_Hydroclimate_Thumbnail-320x240.jpg)

>>

>> May 3, 2019

>>

>> NASA Study: Human Influence on Global Droughts Goes Back 100 Years

>>

>> more news

>>

>> ## Get the Newsletter

>>

>> ## Stay Connected

>>

>> ![twitter](/assets/twitter_icon@2x.png)
![facebook](/assets/facebook_icon@2x.png)
![instagram](/assets/instagram_icon@2x.png) ![rss](/assets/rss_icon@2x.png)

>>

>> ### Facts

>>  
>>                 >>                       *             * Evidence

>>  
>>                         * Causes

>>  
>>                         * Effects

>>  
>>                         * Scientific Consensus

>>  
>>                         * Vital Signs

>>  
>>                         * Questions (FAQ)

>>  
>>

>> ### Articles

>>  
>>                 >>                       *             * News and Features

>>  
>>                         * Blog

>>  
>>                         * Fun Facts

>>  
>>

>> ### Solutions

>>  
>>                 >>                       *             * Mitigation and
Adaptation

>>  
>>                         * Government Resources

>>  
>>

>> ### Explore

>>  
>>                 >>                       *             * Images of Change

>>  
>>                         * Earth Minute Videos

>>  
>>                         * Interactives

>>  
>>                         * Mobile Apps

>>  
>>                         * Beautiful Earth Gallery

>>  
>>                         * Earth 360

>>  
>>

>> ### Resources

>>  
>>                 >>                       *             * Graphics and
Multimedia

>>  
>>                         * For Educators

>>  
>>                         * Climate Kids

>>  
>>                         * About Global Warming

>>  
>>                         * About Climate Change

>>  
>>

>> ### NASA Science

>>  
>>                 >>                       *             * Science Mission
Directorate

>>  
>>                         * Earth System Science

>>  
>>                         * Earth Science Missions

>>  
>>                         * History

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * About Us

>>  
>>

>> |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Feedback

>>  
>>

>> |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Awards

>>  
>>

>> |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Earth Observatory

>>  
>>

>> |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * SEA LEVEL CHANGE

>>  
>>

>> |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Privacy

>>  
>>

>> |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Climate Data Initiative

>>  
>>

>> |

>>  
>>                 >>                       * U.S. CLIMATE RESILIENCE TOOLKIT

>>  
>>

>> This website is produced by the Earth Science Communications Team at

>>

>> NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory | California Institute of Technology

>>

>> Site Editor: Holly Shaftel  
>  Site Manager: Randal Jackson  
>  Science Editor: Susan Callery  
>

>>

>> Site last updated: May 28, 2019

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

