
>

>> Skip to main content

>>

>> # Union of Concerned Scientists

>>

>> # ![Union of Concerned

>>

>>
Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-
ucs.png)

>>

>> en español __

>>

>> ## Search form

>>

>> Search

>>

>> ## Main Menu

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Our Work

>>  
>>                         * Clean Energy

>>  
>>                         * Clean Vehicles

>>  
>>                         * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                         * Global Warming

>>  
>>                         * Nuclear Power

>>  
>>                         * Nuclear Weapons

>>  
>>                         * Center for Science and Democracy

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                         * Accomplishments & History

>>  
>>                         * Leadership & Experts

>>  
>>                         * Funding & Financials

>>  
>>                         * Ways to Give

>>  
>>                         * News Center

>>  
>>                         * Jobs at UCS

>>  
>>                         * Contact Us

>>  
>>                         * The UCS Store: Say It With Science!

>>  
>>                       * Take Action

>>  
>>                         * Science Network

>>  
>>                       * Subscribe

>>  
>>                       * Donate

>>  
>>                         * Renew Your Membership

>>  
>>                         * Become a Member

>>  
>>                         * Give Monthly

>>  
>>                         * Make a Planned Gift

>>  
>>                         * More Ways to Give

>>  
>>                         * Gifts in Honor or Memory

>>  
>>                         * Gift Memberships

>>  
>>                       * Science Network Leaders

>>  
>>

>> **search**

>>

>> ## You are here

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. Global Warming

>>  
>>                       2. » Global Warming Science

>>  
>>

>> # Global Warming FAQ

>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2018/06/1200-floodingchild.jpg)

>>

>> Photo: usacetulsa/Flickr

>>

>> ### What is global warming?

>>

>> When carbon (CO2 or carbon dioxide) and other heat-trapping emissions are
released into the air, they act like a blanket, holding heat in our atmosphere
and warming the planet.

>>

>> Overloading our atmosphere with carbon has far-reaching effects for people
all around the world, including rising sea levels, increasing wildfires, more
extreme weather, deadly heat waves, and more severe droughts.

>>

>> ### What causes global warming?

>>

>> The primary cause of global warming is human activity that releases carbon
into the atmosphere, most significantly the burning of fossil fuels to drive
cars, generate electricity, and operate our homes and businesses.

>>

>> Tropical deforestation, also by human hands, is another major contributor.
When these forests are burned, they release huge amounts of carbon into the
atmosphere and in addition, because the forests no longer exist, they are no
longer available to absorb CO2.

>>

>> ### Who can reduce global warming?

>>

>> To address global warming, we need to significantly reduce the amount of
heat-trapping emissions. As individuals, we can help by being mindful of our
electricity use, driving more efficient cars, reducing the number of miles we
drive, and taking other steps to reduce our own consumption of fossil fuels.

>>

>> But we can also help by calling for government and corporate decision
makers to reduce the threat of global warming by:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Expanding the use of renewable
energy and transforming our

>>  
>>

>> energy system to one that is cleaner and less dependent on coal and other
fossil fuels.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Increasing vehicle fuel
efficiency and supporting other

>>  
>>

>> solutions that reduce US oil use.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Placing limits on the amount of
carbon that polluters are

>>  
>>

>> allowed to emit.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Building a clean energy economy
by investing in efficient energy

>>  
>>

>> technologies, industries, and approaches.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Reducing tropical deforestation
and its associated global

>>  
>>

>> warming emissions.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Implementing effective national
and regional climate policies.

>>  
>>

>> ### How do we know that humans are the major cause of global warming?

>>

>> We all know that warming—and cooling—has happened in the past, and long
before humans were around. Many factors (called “climate drivers”) can
influence Earth’s climate—such as changes in the sun’s intensity and volcanic
eruptions, as well as heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere.

>>

>> So how do scientists know that today’s warming is primarily caused by
humans putting too much carbon in the atmosphere when we burn coal, oil, and
gas or cut down forests? We know human activities are driving the increase in
CO2 concentrations because atmospheric CO2 contains information about its
source. Scientists can tease apart how much CO2 comes from natural sources,
and how much comes from burning coal, oil and gas (called fossil fuels).

>>

>> Carbon from fossil fuels has a distinct “signature,” essentially the
relative amounts of heavier and lighter atoms of carbon, than carbon from
other sources. The smaller the ratio of heavier to lighter carbon atoms, the
higher the proportion of carbon from fossil fuels.

>>

>> Over the years, the ratio of heavy to light carbon atoms has decreased
while the overall amount of CO2 has increased. This information tells
scientists that fossil fuel emissions are the largest contributor of
atmospheric CO2 concentrations since the pre-industrial era.

>>

>> Moreover, natural changes alone can’t explain the temperature changes we’ve
seen. For a computer model to accurately project the future climate,
scientists must first ensure that it accurately reproduces observed
temperature changes. When the models include only recorded natural climate
drivers—such as the sun’s intensity—the models cannot accurately reproduce the
observed warming of the past half century. When human-induced climate drivers
are also included in the models, then they accurately capture recent
temperature increases in the atmosphere and in the oceans. When all the
natural and human-induced climate drivers are compared to one another, the
dramatic accumulation of carbon from human sources is by far the largest
climate change driver over the past half century.

>>

>> ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/Fig10-21.jpg)

>>

>> When models take into account both natural and human drivers, they better
reflect the observed changes in temperature.  
>  Source: IPCC AR5

>>

>> Explore more about humans' role in global warming.

>>

>> Back to top.

>>

>> ### Why does CO2 get most of the attention when there are so many other

>>

>> heat-trapping gases?

>>

>> Global warming is primarily a problem of too much carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere. This carbon overload is caused mainly when we burn fossil fuels
like coal, oil and gas or cut down and burn forests. There are many heat-
trapping gases (e.g. methane and water vapor), but CO2 puts us at the greatest
risk of irreversible changes if it continues to accumulate unabated in the
atmosphere. There are two key reasons why.

>>

>> **CO2 has contributed more than any driver to climate change between 1750
and 2011:**

>>

>> The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) issued a global
climate assessment in 2013 that compared the influence of three changes to the
environment resulting from human activity between 1750 and 2011: the emission
of key heat-trapping gases, the release of tiny particles known as aerosols ,
and land use change.

>>

>> By measuring the abundance of heat-trapping gases in ice cores and the
atmosphere, and other climate drivers along with models , the IPCC calculated
the “radiative forcing” (RF) of each climate driver—in other words, the net
increase (or decrease) in the amount of energy reaching Earth’s surface
attributable to that climate driver.

>>

>> Positive RF values represent average surface warming and negative values
represent average surface cooling. In total, CO2 has the highest positive RF
(see Figure 1) of all the human-influenced climate drivers compared by the
IPCC.

>>

>> Other gases like methane are more effective at trapping heat than CO2 but
don’t contribute as much to warming because they are simply far less abundant
in the atmosphere.

>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2018/05/1200-figure2_3.jpg)

>>

>> Figure 1. How does carbon dioxide compare to other climate drivers? Carbon
dioxide (CO2), more than any other climate driver, has contributed the most to
climate change between 1750 and 2011. Radiative forcing units are expressed as
the power (watts) per square meter surface area of Earth.  
>  Source: CSSR

>>

>> Explore more about CO2 and other heat trapping gases.

>>

>> Back to top.

>>

>> ### Does air pollution—specifically particulate matter (aerosols)—affect

>>

>> global warming?

>>

>> Air pollution occurs when gases, dust, smoke, or fumes reach harmful levels
in the atmosphere. Tiny atmospheric particles known as aerosols are a kind of
air pollution that is? suspended in our atmosphere.

>>

>> Aerosol can be both solid and liquid. Most are produced by natural
processes such as erupting volcanoes, and some are from human industrial and
agricultural activities.

>>

>> Aerosols have a measurable effect on global warming. Light-colored aerosol
particles can reflect incoming energy from the sun in cloud-free air and dark
particles can absorb it. Historically, the net effect globally from aerosols
was to partially offset the rise in global mean surface temperature. Aerosols
can modify how much energy clouds reflect and they can change atmospheric
circulation patterns.

>>

>> Several climate intervention also known as “geoengineering”) strategies for
reducing global warming propose using atmospheric aerosol particles to reflect
the sun’s energy away from Earth. Because aerosol particles do not stay in the
atmosphere for very long—and global warming gases stay in the atmosphere for
decades to centuries—accumulated heat-trapping gases will overpower any
temporary cooling due to short-lived aerosol particles.

>>

>> ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2016/08/gw-science-

aerosols-2016.jpeg)

>>

>> This portrait of global aerosols was produced by a GEOS-5 simulation at a
10-kilometer resolution. Dust (red) is lifted from the surface, sea salt
(blue) swirls inside cyclones, smoke (green) rises from fires, and sulfate
particles (white) stream from volcanoes and fossil fuel emissions.  
>  Source: William Putman, NASA/Goddard

>>

>> Explore more about air pollution and global warming.

>>

>> Back to top.

>>

>> ### How does the sun affect our climate?

>>

>> ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/gw-science-

history-climate-drivers.png)

>>

>> Drivers of global average surface temperature “anomalies” (changes away
from the 1961-1990 average global surface temperature). (a): Global average
surface temperature measurements (in black) and (in red) global average
surface temperature modeled by a computer using solar, volcanic, and other
natural (internal variability) factors, as well as human (anthropogenic)
factors. The extent to which changes in solar radiation (b), volcanoes (c),
other internal variability (d) factors, and human (anthropogenic) (e) factors
have driven changes in global average surface temperature.  
>  Source: IPCC AR5

>>

>> The sun is the source of most of the energy that drives the biological and
physical processes in the world around us—in oceans and on land it fuels plant
growth that forms the base of the food chain, and in the atmosphere it warms
air, which drives our weather.

>>

>> The rate of energy coming from the sun changes slightly day to day. Over
many millennia, the Earth-Sun orbital relationship can change the geographical
distribution of the sun’s energy over the Earth’s surface. It has been
suggested that changes in solar output might affect our climate—both directly,
by changing the rate of solar heating of the Earth and atmosphere, and
indirectly, by altering cloud forming processes.

>>

>> On a time-scale of millions of years, changes in solar intensity is a
critical factor influencing climate (e.g., ice ages). However, changes to
solar heating rate over the last century cannot account for the magnitude and
distribution of the rise in global mean temperature, and there is no
convincing evidence for significant indirect influences on our climate due to
twentieth century changes in solar output.

>>

>> Explore more about the sun's effect on our climate.

>>

>> Back to top.

>>

>> ### Is there a connection between the hole in the ozone layer and global

>>

>> warming?

>>

>> Ozone (O3) high in the atmosphere absorbs ultraviolet (UV) radiation from
the sun, preventing it from reaching the Earth’s surface where it can harm
people, planets, and animals. UV radiation is dangerous and can cause health
problems from eye damage to skin cancer. The term “ozone hole” refers to
recent depletion of this protective ozone layer over Earth's polar regions.

>>

>> The ozone hole, however, is not a mechanism of global warming. UV radiation
represents less than one percent of the energy from the sun—not enough to be
the cause of the excess heat from human activities. Global warming is caused
primarily from putting too much carbon into the atmosphere when coal, gas, and
oil are burned to generate electricity or to run our cars. These gases spread
around the planet like a blanket, keeping in solar heat that would otherwise
be radiated out into space. (For more detail on the basic mechanism of global
warming, see carbon dioxide FAQ.)

>>

>> Ozone depletion and global warming do, however, have a common cause—human
activities that release gases into and alter the atmosphere. Ozone depletion
occurs when chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)—once common in aerosol spray cans and
refrigerants—are released into the atmosphere. These gases break down ozone
molecules through several chemical reactions, reducing ozone's UV radiation-
absorbing capacity.

>>

>> Because our atmosphere is one connected system, it is not surprising that
ozone depletion and global warming are related in other ways. For example,
evidence suggests that climate change may contribute to thinning of the
protective ozone layer.

>>

>> Explore more about the ozone hole and global warming.

>>

>> Back to top.

>>

>> ### What is the best source of scientific information on global warming?

>>

>> In 1988, the United Nations Environment Programme and the World
Meteorological Organization set up the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) to examine the most current scientific information on global
warming and climate change. Thousands of authors and scientific expert
reviewers from 195 member countries contribute to the panel's periodic
assessments of climate change and its impacts.

>>

>> These scientists review all the published and peer-reviewed scientific
information produced during the previous few years to assess what is known
about the global climate, why and how it changes, what it will mean for people
and the environment, and what can be done about it.

>>

>> The IPCC Fifth Assessment Report is the most comprehensive evaluation of
global warming that serves as the basis for international climate
negotiations.

>>

>> The most up-to-date comprehensive climate assessment for the United States
was released in 2017 by 13 federal agencies participating in the U.S. Global
Change Research Program (USGCRP). Explore more about the USGCRP report on US
climate change impacts.

>>

>> Explore more about the scientific consensus on climate change.

>>

>> Back to top.

>>

>> ### Is global warming already happening?

>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2018/06/1200-arielflooding.jpg)

>>

>> Photo: Master Sgt. Bill Huntington/US Air Force

>>

>> Yes. We know it is getting warmer. Record warm temperatures keep coming up
month after month, year after year, locally and globally. However,
temperatures are but one of many indicators of global warming. With warmer
temperatures come various changes that also point to a steady change in our
world.

>>

>> Examples of observed climatic changes:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Increase in global average
surface temperature of about 1°C

>>  
>>

>> since the pre-industrial age.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Decrease of snow cover and sea
ice extent and the retreat of

>>  
>>

>> mountain glaciers in the latter half of the 20th century.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Rise in global average sea level
and increase in ocean water

>>  
>>

>> temperatures.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Likely increase in average
precipitation over the middle and

>>  
>>

>> high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, and over tropical land areas.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Increase in the frequency and
intensity of extreme precipitation

>>  
>>

>> events in some regions of the world.

>>

>> Examples of observed physical and ecological changes:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Thawing of permafrost

>>  
>>                       * Lengthening of the growing season in middle and
high latitudes

>>  
>>                       * Poleward and upward shift of plant and animal
ranges

>>  
>>                       * Decline of some plant and animal species

>>  
>>                       * Earlier flowering of trees

>>  
>>                       * Earlier emergence of insects

>>  
>>                       * Earlier egg-laying in birds

>>  
>>

>> Read more about the signs of global warming.

>>

>> Back to top.

>>

>> Last revised date: May 24, 2018

>>

>> ## We Need Your Support

>>

>> to Make Change Happen

>>

>> We _can_ reduce global warming emissions and ensure communities have the
resources they need to withstand the effects of climate change—but not without
you. Your generous support helps develop science-based solutions for a
healthy, safe, and sustainable future.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * $25

>>  
>>                       * $50

>>  
>>                       * $100

>>  
>>                       * $250

>>  
>>                       * $1000

>>  
>>                       * Other

>>  
>>

>> Donate

>>  
>>                 >>                       * $25

>>  
>>                       * $50

>>  
>>                       * $100

>>  
>>                       * $250

>>  
>>                       * $1000

>>  
>>                       * Other

>>  
>>

>> Donate

>>

>> ## Share

>>  
>>                 >>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>

>> ## Related Content

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Does Snow and Cold Weather
Disprove Climate Change?

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Causes of Sea Level Rise (2013)

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Past, Present, and Future Temperatures: the
Hockeystick FAQ

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * What You Can Do About Global Warming

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * The Science Connecting Extreme Weather to Climate
Change (2018)

>>  
>>

>> ## From our blogs

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Bury Myers’ NOAA Nomination Dr.
Jane Willenbring, Associate

>>  
>>

>> Professor at the Institution of Oceanography; Dr. Amy Freitag is a contract
social scientistJune 6, 2019

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Wheeler’s Breathtaking Ignorance
of Science, in One Comment

>>  
>>

>> Gretchen GoldmanJune 6, 2019

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Will the Trump USDA Deliver on
the Dietary Guidelines for

>>  
>>

>> Americans? Our New Report Shows What’s at Stake Sarah ReinhardtJune 6, 2019

>>

>> More

>>

>> ## On Twitter

>>

>> Tweets by @UCSUSA

>>

>> ## Infographic

>>

>> ## EXTREME WEATHER AND CLIMATE CHANGE

>>

>> ![Extreme Weather and Climate Change

Infographic](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2014/07/Infographic-

extreme-weather-and-climate-change.jpg?itok=Ig86J4OV)

>>

>> Strong scientific evidence links climate change with increasing heat waves,
coastal flooding, and other extreme weather events.

>>

>> ## SEA LEVEL RISE AND GLOBAL WARMING

>>

>> ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2016/11/gw-impacts-

sea-level-rise-infographic-sidebar-graphic-308px.jpg)

>>

>> Sea level is rising—at an accelerating rate—especially along the U.S. East
Coast and Gulf of Mexico.

>>

>> ## WESTERN WILDFIRES AND CLIMATE CHANGE

>>

>> ![Western Wildfires and Climate

Change](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2014/07/Infographic-

western-wildfires-and-climate-change.jpg?itok=1BlISsgQ)

>>

>> Rising temperatures are increasing wildfire risk throughout the Western
U.S.

>>

>> ## Take Action

>>  
>>                 >>                       *

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_default/public/images/2019/01/gw-

air-pollution.jpg?itok=qWFf0EMB)

>>

>> We have reached a tipping point on climate action—Scientists say we have
roughly one decade left to avoid the most severe consequences of climate
change. Urge your legislators to act on climate.

>>

>> We need swift, equitable, significant, and effective climate action. >

>>

>> We use cookies so that you will have the best possible experience on our
website. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies for site
features. Learn more in our privacy policy.

>>

>> I Accept

>>

>> ![Untion of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-

ucs.png)

>>

>> ## Science for a healthy planet and safer world

>>  
>>                 >>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>                       * __

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * About Us

>>  
>>                         * UCS Leadership & Experts

>>  
>>                         * Funding & Financials

>>  
>>                         * History & Accomplishments

>>  
>>                         * Jobs & Internships

>>  
>>                         * News

>>  
>>                       * Issues

>>  
>>                         * Clean Energy

>>  
>>                         * Clean Vehicles

>>  
>>                         * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                         * Global Warming

>>  
>>                         * Nuclear Power

>>  
>>                         * Nuclear Weapons

>>  
>>                       * Our Podcast

>>  
>>                         * Got Science?

>>  
>>                       * Publications

>>  
>>                       * Reports & Analysis

>>  
>>                       * Center for Science and Democracy

>>  
>>                       * Action Center

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * State Disclosures

>>  
>>                       * Our Blogs

>>  
>>                         * The Equation

>>  
>>                         * All Things Nuclear

>>  
>>                       * Site Map

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * UCS Store

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Ways to Give

>>  
>>                         * Donate

>>  
>>                         * Give Monthly

>>  
>>                         * Planned Gifts

>>  
>>                       * How to Help

>>  
>>                         * Become a Member

>>  
>>                         * Take Action

>>  
>>                         * Subscribe

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * A **Normal Font Size**

>>  
>>                       * A **Larger Font Size**

>>  
>>                       * A **Largest Font Size**

>>  
>>

>> **Union of Concerned Scientists**  
>  2 Brattle Square, Cambridge MA 02138-3780

>>

>> (C) Union of Concerned Scientists  
>  UCS is a 501c(3) organization

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

