
>

>> >>                       * 日本語

>>  
>>

>> #

>>  
>>                 >>                       * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

>>  
>>                       * DEVELOPMENT & SOCIETY

>>  
>>                       * PEACE & SECURITY

>>  
>>                       * HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS

>>  
>>                       * HUMAN RIGHTS

>>  
>>                       * More

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * The Magazine

>>  
>>                         * Our Partners

>>  
>>                         * Contributors

>>  
>>                         * Contact us

>>  
>>

>> _SECTIONS_

>>  
>>                 >>                       * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

>>  
>>                       * DEVELOPMENT & SOCIETY

>>  
>>                       * PEACE & SECURITY

>>  
>>                       * HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS

>>  
>>                       * HUMAN RIGHTS

>>  
>>                       * More

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * The Magazine

>>  
>>                         * Our Partners

>>  
>>                         * Contributors

>>  
>>                         * Contact us

>>  
>>

>> # Eating Less Meat Essential to Curb Climate Change, Says Report

>>

>> DEVELOPMENT & SOCIETY : Agriculture, Climate Change, Sustainability

>>

>> 2014•12•05 Damian Carrington The Guardian

>>  
>>                 >>                       * _53 Comments_

>>  
>>                       * _Email_

>>  
>>                       * _Tweet_

>>  
>>                       * _Share_

>>  
>>

>> ![Eating Less Meat Essential to Curb Climate Change Says

Report](https://i.unu.edu/media/ourworld.unu.edu-en/article/13572/Eating-Less-

Meat-Essential-to-Curb-Climate-Change-Says-Report-.jpg)

>>

>> Photo: Robert Couse-Baker. Creative Commons BY (cropped).

>>

>> Curbing the world’s huge and increasing appetite for meat is essential to
avoid devastating climate change, according to a new report. But governments
and green campaigners are doing nothing to tackle the issue due to fears of a
consumer backlash, warns the analysis from the thinktank Chatham House.

>>

>> The global livestock industry produces more greenhouse gas emissions than
all cars, planes, trains and ships combined, but a worldwide survey by Ipsos
MORI in the report finds twice as many people think transport is the bigger
contributor to global warming.

>>

>> “Preventing catastrophic warming is dependent on tackling meat and dairy
consumption, but the world is doing very little,” said Rob Bailey, the
report’s lead author. “A lot is being done on deforestation and transport, but
there is a huge gap on the livestock sector. There is a deep reluctance to
engage because of the received wisdom that it is not the place of governments
or civil society to intrude into people’s lives and tell them what to eat.”

>>

>> The recent landmark report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change found that dietary change can “substantially lower” emissions but there
is no UN plan to achieve that.

>>

>> Past calls to cut meat eating by high-profile figures, from the chief of
the UN’s climate science panel to the economist Lord Stern, have been both
rare and controversial. Other scientists have proposed a meat tax to curb
consumption, but the report concludes that keeping meat eating to levels
recommended by health authorities would not only lower emissions but also
reduce heart disease and cancer. “The research does not show everyone has to
be a vegetarian to limit warming to 2C, the stated objective of the world’s
governments,” said Bailey.

>>

>> ![Largest meat consumers](https://i.unu.edu/media/ourworld.unu.edu-

en/article/13572/Largest-meat-consumers.png)

>>

>> The report builds on recent scientific studies that show that soaring meat
demand in China and elsewhere could tip the world’s climate into chaos.
Emissions from livestock, largely from burping cows and sheep and their
manure, currently make up almost 15% of global emissions. Beef and dairy alone
make up 65% of all livestock emissions.

>>

>> Appetite for meat is rocketing as the global population swells and becomes
more able to afford meat. Meat consumption is on track to rise 75% by 2050,
and dairy 65%, compared with 40% for cereals. By 2020, China alone is expected
to be eating 20m tonnes more of meat and dairy a year.

>>

>> Two recent peer-reviewed studies calculated that, without severe cuts in
this trend, agricultural emissions will take up the entire world’s carbon
budget by 2050, with livestock a major contributor. This would mean every
other sector, including energy, industry and transport, would have to be zero
carbon, which is described as “impossible”. The Chatham House report
concludes: “Dietary change is essential if global warming is not to exceed
2°C.”

>>

>> ![Forecast meat consumption](https://i.unu.edu/media/ourworld.unu.edu-

en/article/13572/Forecast-meat-consumption.png)

>>

>> The consumer survey in the report, covering 12 nations including the US,
China, India, Brazil and the EU bloc, found a link between the awareness of
climate change and its impacts and the willingness to change behaviour.
Acceptance that human activities cause climate change was significantly higher
in China, India and Brazil than in the US, UK and Japan.

>>

>> The good news, said Bailey, was that “the majority of future demand appears
to be in the countries [like China and Brazil] that are the most receptive to
change”. He said it was “pretty disappointing” that in developed countries,
where meat and dairy eating is highest, awareness of livestock’s impact on the
climate is low and willingness to change is low.

>>

>> ![Human activities](https://i.unu.edu/media/ourworld.unu.edu-

en/article/13572/Human-activities.png)

>>

>> Brigitte Alarcon, sustainable food policy officer at WWF said: “Our
LiveWell project has shown we can cut a quarter of our climate emissions from
the European food supply chain by eating more pulses, fruit and vegetables and
by reducing our meat consumption. National governments should improve food
education to encourage healthy eating habits and environmental sustainability
as a first step.”

>>

>> A spokesman for the UK government said: “Greenhouse gas emissions from the
UK agricultural industry have fallen by more than 20% since 1990. While food
choices can have an impact on emissions, well managed livestock also provide
many environmental benefits including supporting biodiversity.”

>>

>> A separate survey by the Eating Better alliance, also published on
Wednesday, shows that UK consumers are beginning to eat less meat. The YouGov
poll found 20% saying they have cut the amount of meat they eat over the last
year, with only 5% say they are eating more.

>>

>> Prof Keith Richards, at the University of Cambridge and one of the
researchers behind the two key scientific studies, said: “This is not a
radical vegetarian argument; it is an argument about eating meat in sensible
amounts as part of healthy, balanced diets.”

>>

>> Copyright The Guardian. All rights reserved.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * _Email_

>>  
>>                       * _Tweet_

>>  
>>                       * _Share_

>>  
>>

>> JOIN THE DISCUSSION BELOW

>>

>> #### Author

>>

>> ### Damian Carrington

>>

>> The Guardian

>>

>> Damian Carrington is head of environment at the Guardian.

>>

>> #### Related Articles

>>

>> ![New Research Says Plant-based Diet Best for Planet and

People](https://i.unu.edu/media/ourworld.unu.edu-en/article/13274/New-

Research-Says-Plant-based-Diet-Best-for-Planet-and-People-140x80.jpg)

>>

>> ## New Research Says Plant-based Diet Best for Planet and People

>>

>> ![Bushmeat stories: Voices from the Congo

Basin](https://i.unu.edu/media/ourworld.unu.edu-en/article/5280/Bushmeat-

stories-Voices-from-the-Congo-Basin--140x80.jpg)

>>

>> ## Bushmeat Stories: Voices from the Congo Basin

>>

>> ![Reversing desertification with

livestock](https://i.unu.edu/media/ourworld.unu.edu-en/article/4716/Reversing-

Desertification-with-Livestock-140x80.jpg)

>>

>> ## Reversing Desertification with Livestock

>>

>> ![Tokyo Drifts from Seafood to Meat

Eating](https://i.unu.edu/media/ourworld.unu.edu-en/article/2323/tokyo-drifts-

from-seafood-to-meat-eating-140x80.jpg)

>>

>> ## Tokyo Drifts from Seafood to Meat Eating

>>

>> ![Artificial meat? Food for thought for

2050](https://i.unu.edu/media/ourworld.unu.edu-en/article/2251/artificial-

meat-140x80.jpg)

>>

>> ## Artificial Meat? Food for Thought for 2050

>>

>> ![meat or climate](https://i.unu.edu/media/ourworld.unu.edu-

en/article/998/test_image02-13-copy-140x80.jpg)

>>

>> ## Debate: Meat or the Climate? Pick One!

>>

>> ## Join the Discussion

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Why Vegan? | Liminal
Space()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: One man's meat is another's global
ecological calamity

>>  
>>

>> | ThinkOrSwim (the Climatechange.ie Blog)()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: VIDEO: Meat Represents
"Toughness"? - Toxic Hungr()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Final Post 3: Cut the Meat, Save the
Earth |

>>  
>>

>> Mathematics for Sustainability: Spring 2016()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: 5 Ways To Be A
Climate-Friendly Eater In 2016 -

>>  
>>

>> Hundredgivers()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Sustain(Ability) |
BLUEBERRY RUMORS()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Eat locals: swapping sheep and cows for
kangaroos and

>>  
>>

>> camels could help our environment | Em News()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Eat locals: swapping
sheep and cows for kangaroos and

>>  
>>

>> camels could help our environment - Free Online Stuff()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: This veggie burger is
so juicy it literally bleeds |

>>  
>>

>> Grist()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: This veggie burger is
so juicy it literally bleeds -

>>  
>>

>> Enjeux énergies et environnement()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: This veggie burger is
so juicy it literally bleeds -

>>  
>>

>> Green Energy Ninja()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Sustainable eating:
Alternatives to Cow's Milk |

>>  
>>

>> theshelljar()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Going Vegetarian |
Impatient Foodie()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Meatless Month - From the Ground Up()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: 10 ways to be a green traveler in Prague
- Prague

>>  
>>

>> Green City Guide()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Sierra Club Makes
Strange Case For Eating Meat |

>>  
>>

>> completenews()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Animal Farm
(Assignment for Magazine Editing Class) -

>>  
>>

>> Aidan Macnab - Journalism Student - Blog Writer()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: The Solution is in Our
Hands()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Vegetarians Are Watering Down Their
Movement to Appeal

>>  
>>

>> to Meat-Lovers - IT AND US()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Vegetarians Are
Watering Down Their Movement to Appeal

>>  
>>

>> to Meat-Lovers - The Space Out()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Vegetarians Are
Watering Down Their Movement to Appeal

>>  
>>

>> to Meat-Lovers - Grejeen Trends()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: These
Environmentalists Say Meat Is Okay Sometimes -

>>  
>>

>> Grejeen Trends()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: These
Environmentalists Say Meat Is OK Sometimes |

>>  
>>

>> Gizmodo Australia()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: “Redutivarianismo”, a
tentativa de amenizar o impacto

>>  
>>

>> ambiental diminuindo o consumo de carne - FUNVERDE()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Becoming A Vegetarian
- Coffee Stains and College()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Climate Change: 3 Ways You Can Make a
Difference

>>  
>>

>> Through Mindful Consumption - Always Well Within()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Welcome to The Salad
Lobby » The Salad Lobby()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Letter to the Editor: Meat our dying
earth - The

>>  
>>

>> Oracle()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Slow Climate Change -
By Eating! - EcoFriendlyLink()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Fleisch - Animal-Protection-Austria()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: How to 'Go Green' In Your Kitchen: 8 Tips
Everyone

>>  
>>

>> Should Know()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Our Future, AI and
Veganism: 6 Reasons Why I Went

>>  
>>

>> Vegan()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: La eliminación de la
producción de carne de res

>>  
>>

>> ayudaría a la reducción sustancial de los gases efectos invernadero |
werken rojo()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Die Wahrheit über
Fleisch - Animal-Protection-

>>  
>>

>> Austria()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: 30 Tips for reducing
your carbon footprint and

>>  
>>

>> demanding climate action - USC Environment Collective()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Utthita Parsvakonasana
- Enviro-Yogi()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Video Voiceover References: - WME:
Research Blog()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Slowing Climate Change, One Steak at a
Time - MIT

>>  
>>

>> Admissions()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Slowing Climate
Change, One Steak at a Time | MIT

>>  
>>

>> Admissions()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Green eating in black
and white - Canopy Press()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Letter to the Editor: Meat our dying
earth - The Real

>>  
>>

>> Scientist()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: giantmecha // Blog
Archive // Eating Less Meat

>>  
>>

>> Essential to Curb Climate Change, Says Report()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: 7 Simple Lifestyle
Tips to Reduce Your Carbon

>>  
>>

>> Footprint | Fresh Ortho()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: 10 Easy Ways To Reduce
Your Environmental Footprint -

>>  
>>

>> Nest and Glow()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Diet and the
Environment: Meat Consumption and its

>>  
>>

>> Impact on Climate Change? - welcome to efe majoroh environment blog()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Зворотний бік стейка:
метан, вуглець і нітрати -

>>  
>>

>> ukrainenews.online()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Reducing Your Carbon
Footprint()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: Hazards of Carbon - Hazards of Carbon()

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Pingback: 5 Simple And Easy Ways You Can Reduce
Your Carbon

>>  
>>

>> Footprints | OurBlogPost()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Oumar Barou Togola:
Why diversifying our diets is one

>>  
>>

>> step towards local weather resilience - danilhush()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Oumar Barou Togola:
Why diversifying our diets is one

>>  
>>

>> step towards local weather resilience - daniltalks()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Oumar Barou Togola:
Why diversifying our diets is one

>>  
>>

>> step towards local weather resilience - danilposh()

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pingback: Oumar Barou Togola:
Why diversifying our diets is one

>>  
>>

>> step toward climate resilience()

>>

>> #### Topics

>>  
>>                 >>                       * SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

>>  
>>                       * DEVELOPMENT & SOCIETY

>>  
>>                       * PEACE & SECURITY

>>  
>>                       * HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS

>>  
>>                       * HUMAN RIGHTS

>>  
>>

>> #### Partners

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The Guardian

>>  
>>                       * Deutsche Welle - Global Ideas

>>  
>>                       * NHK Stories of Recovery

>>  
>>

>> #### About

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The Magazine

>>  
>>                       * Our Charter

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * Community Standards

>>  
>>                       * Our Partners

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Copyright

>>  
>>

>> BY

>>

>> NC

>>

>> SA

>>

>> #### Social Media

>>  
>>                 >>                       * twitter

>>  
>>                       * facebook

>>  
>>                       * youtube

>>  
>>

>> 53–70, Jingumae 5-chome,  
>  Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150-8925,  
>  Japan Tel: +81 3 5467 1212  
>  Fax: +81 3 3499 2828

>>

>> Designed and Developed  
>  by the UNU Office of Communications

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

