
>

>> ![](https://www.brazen.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/New_Logo-v1.png)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * How It Works

>>  
>>                       * Benefits

>>  
>>                       * University

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                       * Login

>>  
>>                       * Demo

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Virtual career fairs

>>  
>>                       * Scheduled chat

>>  
>>                       * QuickChat

>>  
>>                       * Chatbot

>>  
>>                       * Integrations

>>  
>>                       * Sourcing

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Blog

>>  
>>                       * Resources

>>  
>>                       * Company

>>  
>>                       * Careers

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>

>> __Back to the Blog Overview

>>

>> __

>>

>> Blog  
>  Career Growth

>>

>> ![](/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/BrazenDefault.jpg)

>>

>> # Working Harder Won’t Get You Promoted, But This Will

>>

>> By Joe Matar • July 9, 2014

>>

>> Think you should get promoted because you work hard? Think again. Instead
of working your butt off, follow this strategy.

>>

>> In our quest for financial freedom, we often work hard seeing a promotion
as a direct payoff for our sweat equity.

>>

>> **But if you really want to see your efforts pay off, you must be more
strategic. Many employees tend to ignore the big picture that influences
whether or not theyget a promotion.**

>>

>> Truth is, the CEO and leadership team of your company have a vision they
want to see come to life. By tapping into your boss’s vision for success, you
can position yourself as a key contributor to the mission of the company,
advancing you to the next level of responsibility _and_ income.

>>

>> ## Step 1: Find out what's bugging your boss

>>

>> If you want to know and understand executive-level thinking, talk to a few
execs. One recent study, cited by Quint Careers, found that in four out of
five promotions, those who had been promoted had developed a mentoring
relationship with their bosses.

>>

>> Initiate small talk about work and family. Engage in general chit-chat.
Make a regular habit of asking your boss if she needs help with anything.
Pinpoint trouble areas and look for solutions. Be sure to stay positive and
solution- oriented in your daily communications.

>>

>> Communicate that you’re fully invested in the success of the company with
your words and your behavior. Volunteer for additional work. Being the first
to sign up for extra projects will relieve pressure from your team and your
boss.

>>

>> Raise your hand and take ownership over what you may think to be even the
most menial of tasks. Taking care of the needs of your company will help
establish you as the “go-to” person when your leadership team has a need.

>>

>> ## Step 2: Improve upon existing processes and challenge norms

>>

>> You’re either part of the problem or part of the solution.

>>

>> Instead of badmouthing your boss and your company by complaining, position
yourself as a rising leader within your department. Focus on finding a
solution. Look for ways to fill in the gaps in your company. Listen to what
others are saying and try to determine what connections can be made.

>>

>> Instead of whining to your boss about system failures, prescribe a remedy
to the problem. (Click here to tweet this quote.) Research competitors and
similarly structured businesses in different industries to come up with
possible solutions.

>>

>> A form may need to be developed. A meeting may need to be held. New
software may be needed to address that problem. Follow the existing process,
fill in gaps and suggest improvements.

>>

>> When you improve on processes, be sure to include your superior officers in
your decision making process. Involving executives can encourage them to
continue their support and endorsement over time.

>>

>> ## Step 3: Stay positive

>>

>> Another way to position yourself for a promotion and to get on the winning
team is to maintain a positive demeanor. Let your daily interactions with your
boss be pleasant and productive.

>>

>> Research shows that a positive, cheerful person is more likely to be paid
more and promoted faster. It may be easy to keep a good attitude when all is
well, but when the chips are down, a person’s true character usually shows.

>>

>> When you’re facing criticism or are dealing with a high-stress project
that’s coming apart at the seams, allow yourself time to process your anger,
fear, anxiety and other emotions. Cool down before responding to avoid coming
off as defensive.

>>

>> Look on the brighter side of the situation. Stay focused on what lessons
you can learn from the project’s failure. Find ways you can rise above the
situation and concentrate on a solution, instead of the problem.

>>

>> Don’t get caught up in negative talk like gossiping and complaining.
Maintain a positive demeanor about work and life in general. Set a standard
for yourself that your co-workers and bosses can respect.

>>

>> ## Step 4: Show leadership

>>

>> Leadership doesn’t begin with a title. Leadership starts right where you
are. Focus on how you can become an architect of change in your job now.

>>

>> Learn what skills you will need to achieve higher performance at your next
level of promotion. Sometimes this may mean looking beyond your job title and
assessing the needs of the company to determine your next move.

>>

>> By accepting greater responsibility, you gain an opportunity to display
your array of talents as well as prove your value to the company. Show the
executives you care about the company and are willing to do what it takes to
push the business along.

>>

>> As you develop your stance as a mover and shaker in the company, you’ll
start to see your name rising in executive conversations and pretty soon, your
promotion will fall right into place.

>>

>> _Nora Jacques is a Freelance Blogger and Content Strategist with a desire
to see __people optimize their inner strengths and resources, with unique
strategies and principles centered on productivity, family values and faith.
Connect with Nora on_ _Twitter_ _or on her_ _blog_ _._

>>

>> __Tweet

>>

>> __Share 23

>>

>> __+1

>>

>> __Share 9

>>

>> 32 Shares

>>

>> ## 6 Comments

>>  
>>                 >>                       1.

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/780b4591d29001ddf4f5cd404165d3f3?s=50&d=identicon&r=g)

>>

>> ##### ommy says:

>>

>> July 9, 2014 at 7:53 am

>>

>> nice post

>>

>> pipe fitting manufacturers in india  
>  |weld neck flange  
>  |pipe schedule  
>  |blind flange  
>  |pipe fitting  
>  |forged flanges  
>  |flanges  
>  |stainless steel flanges  
>  |flanges manufacturers in india  
>  |steel flanges  
>  |slip on flanges  
>  |carbon steel flanges

>>  
>>                 >>                       2.

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f9238b5fbf68aa92b404f12ec6a55e68?s=50&d=identicon&r=g)

>>

>> ##### jrandom421 says:

>>

>> July 9, 2014 at 4:15 pm

>>

>> It seems like everyone is attempting to game the system, getting promoted
because of 'touchy-feely squishy emotional tricks" that ignore hard reality of
work.  
>  Here's the best way to get promoted: Solve problems. Do it better than
anyone else. Deliver results that matter and make things easier, simpler, more
effective, and cost efficient.  
>  Notice that there isn't anything about 'staying positive" or "sharing a
vision of success"  
>  Go out there and work you butt off! Then we'll talk about promotions!

>>  
>>                 >>                         *

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/22ae4b1d53ae2015397f153794bff091?s=50&d=identicon&r=g)

>>

>> ##### Nora Jacques says:

>>

>> July 10, 2014 at 2:00 pm

>>

>> Yes, hard work is a key component to success! Thanks for sharing your
perspective.

>>  
>>                 >>                       3.

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7a76d65a71879c2decfb7de28b467ef6?s=50&d=identicon&r=g)

>>

>> ##### Mary Gravitt says:

>>

>> July 15, 2014 at 6:23 pm

>>

>> Yes, If you work hard you will learn everything you want to know. It's very
worth it if you love your work with compassion. I always remember that there's
no easy job at all! We must strive for it so that you can earned a lot. Nice
article!

>>  
>>                 >>                       4.

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0b6517006bac52a150b87ac9b27a8e8?s=50&d=identicon&r=g)

>>

>> ##### Greta says:

>>

>> July 20, 2014 at 2:22 am

>>

>> I find these work tips really useful. I realized there is actually more to
your job than the tasks you are supposed to do. I do agree that being promoted
does not only require for you to work hard. For me, you also have to work well
with your colleagues, you should connect with your boss, the environment, and
more importantly, you should be initiative and assertive. There is a lot to
learn from this post. By following the steps on this post, you will definitely
make yourself a better employee and a better person which ultimately will lead
you to a promotion. For those who would like to boost their hiring rate here
are some useful resume templates.

>>  
>>                 >>                       5.

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6f61ce1e83692f2bee91c1b6cd251942?s=50&d=identicon&r=g)

>>

>> ##### Catherine Jules says:

>>

>> July 31, 2014 at 2:07 am

>>

>> So what if you won't get promoted? The only important thing in working is
that you have to give your best shot and that's it! Nobody needs anybody
anyway. Once you trust yourself and your capabilities, you are doing a great
job. Just always remember how to love your work and everything follows.

>>

>> Comments are closed.

>>

>> __  
>  Back to the top

>>

>> # Post navigation

>>  
>>                 >>                       * __Previous Post

>>  
>>                       * Next Post __

>>  
>>

>> ### Connect With Us

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ____

>>  
>>                       * ____

>>  
>>                       * ____

>>  
>>                       * ____

>>  
>>

>> ### Contact Support

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Go to support.brazenconnect.com.

>>  
>>                       * Urgent live event support? Call: 703.947.0787

>>  
>>

>> ### Address

>>

>> 2107 Wilson Blvd. Suite #500  
>  Arlington, VA 22201

>>

>> ### Privacy Policy

>>

>> Privacy policy

>>

>> ### From the Blog

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 5 ways to use text recruiting to
continue conversations with

>>  
>>

>> candidates

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Overview of Jobvite 2019
Recruiting Benchmark Report

>>  
>>                       * 7 Ways to Improve Your In-Person Career Fairs

>>  
>>                       * Why virtual career fairs will save you time and
money

>>  
>>                       * Episode #3 of Talent Acquisition Talks with Ben
Eubanks on AI in

>>  
>>

>> TA

>>

>> Notice: JavaScript is required for this content.

>>

>> (C) 2019 Brazen Technologies, Inc.

>>

>> ![](https://dc.ads.linkedin.com/collect/?pid=42964&fmt=gif) $$ Pricing

>>

>> ![](https://www.brazen.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/New_Logo-v1.png)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * How It Works

>>  
>>                         * Virtual career fairs

>>  
>>                         * Scheduled chat

>>  
>>                         * QuickChat

>>  
>>                         * Chatbots

>>  
>>                         * Integrations

>>  
>>                         * Sourcing

>>  
>>                       * Benefits

>>  
>>                       * University

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                         * Blog

>>  
>>                         * Resources

>>  
>>                         * Company

>>  
>>                         * Careers

>>  
>>                         * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * Login

>>  
>>                       * Demo

>>  
>>

>> By continuing to browse or by clicking "Accept all cookies" you agree to
the storing of cookies on your device, which we use to improve user
experience, track anonymous site usage, and assist in our marketing efforts.
You can read our full cookie policy by clicking "Cookie policy."Accept all
cookiesPrivacy policy

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

