
>

>> # Ocean storage of carbon dioxide

>>

>> From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

>>

>> Jump to navigation Jump to search

>>

>> **Ocean storage of carbon dioxide** (CO 2) is a method of carbon
sequestration. The concept of storing carbon dioxide in the ocean was first
proposed by Italian physicist Cesare Marchetti in his 1976 paper "On
Geoengineering and the carbon dioxide Problem."[1] Since then, the concept of
sequestering atmospheric carbon dioxide in the world's oceans has been
investigated by scientists, engineers, and environmental activists. 39,000 GtC
(gigatonnes of carbon) currently reside in the oceans while only 750 GtC are
in the atmosphere.[2][3] Of the 1300 Gt carbon dioxide from anthropogenic
emissions over the last 200 years, about 38% of that has already gone into the
oceans.[2] Carbon dioxide is currently emitted at 10 GtC per year and the
oceans currently absorb 2.4 Gt carbon dioxide per year. The ocean is an
enormous carbon sink with the capacity to hold thousands more gigatons of
carbon dioxide. Ocean sequestration has the potential to decrease atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentrations according to some scientists.

>>

>> ## Contents

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 1 Ocean chemistry

>>  
>>                       * 2 Dilute carbon dioxide injection and storage

>>  
>>                       * 3 Release of solid carbon dioxide at depth

>>  
>>                       * 4 Mineralization and deep sea sediments

>>  
>>                       * 5 Carbon dioxide plumes

>>  
>>                       * 6 Carbon dioxide lakes

>>  
>>                       * 7 Environmental impacts of deep-sea ocean
sequestration

>>  
>>                         * 7.1 Deep sea biota

>>  
>>                         * 7.2 Effects of pH vs. carbon dioxide

>>  
>>                         * 7.3 Long term effects

>>  
>>                         * 7.4 Minimal impact methods

>>  
>>                       * 8 Blue carbon capture in ocean

>>  
>>                       * 9 Iron fertilization

>>  
>>                         * 9.1 Role of iron in carbon sequestration

>>  
>>                         * 9.2 Carbon sequestration by phytoplankton

>>  
>>                         * 9.3 Efficiency and concerns

>>  
>>                       * 10 Urea fertilization

>>  
>>                       * 11 Seaweed fertilization

>>  
>>                       * 12 Mixing layers

>>  
>>                       * 13 References

>>  
>>

>> ## Ocean chemistry[edit]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/82/Carbonate_Bjerrum.gif/220px-

Carbonate_Bjerrum.gif)

>>

>> Major components after carbon dioxide dissolution in the ocean

>>

>> After atmospheric carbon dioxide dissolves into the ocean, the aqueous
carbon dioxide reacts with seawater to form carbonic acid.[4] As carbonic acid
continues to interact with water molecules, carbonate is formed, which
increases the concentration of hydrogen ions in the ocean and consequently
reduces ocean pH. Therefore, increasing carbon dioxide concentrations in the
atmosphere decreases ocean pH.[5] However, calcium carbonate acts as a buffer
to large decreases in pH. As pH decreases, calcium carbonate dissolution
increases.[6] The IPCC uses 0.1 pH as a marker for acceptable change in ocean
pH comparable to natural pH fluctuations without noticeable environmental
effects. With a 0.1 pH change, the IPCC estimates that 1000 GT of carbon could
be stored in the ocean and decrease negative environmental effects if the same
quantity of carbon remained in the atmosphere.[5] If carbon dioxide remained
in the atmosphere, the resulting change in ocean pH would also be similar as
ocean mixing would eventually absorb excess carbon dioxide.[5]

>>

>> ## Dilute carbon dioxide injection and storage[edit]

>>

>> Dilute carbon dioxide injection requires injection at depths where carbon
dioxide can be dispersed by ocean currents and ocean mixing. Upon injection,
waters interact and mix based on density and dilute the concentration of
carbon dioxide.[5] Boat based carbon dioxide injection distributes low carbon
dioxide concentrations in open waters while moving to increase carbon dioxide
dispersal area. carbon dioxide dispersal via boat can also occur by a pipe
attached to the ship injecting a dilute carbon dioxide mixture into the water
column. The carbon dioxide is usually injected at 1000 m depth to reduce
carbon dioxide bubble escape. As injected carbon dioxide bubbles rise,
dispersal increases up the water column.[7] Large dispersal areas and low
concentrations of carbon dioxide significantly decrease any significant
changes in local pH and resulting effects on marine ecosystems.[7] Wickett et
al. used measurements in natural pH fluctuations from atmospheric carbon
dioxide to suggest that dilute carbon dioxide injection at 0.37 GTC/ yr would
have a negligible effect on ocean pH.[5] Dilute ocean injection requires
little infrastructure in comparison to other forms of ocean injection.[4] The
IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme estimates that dilute carbon dioxide
injection would cost $70 per tonne of carbon dioxide including costs of carbon
capture, transport, and storage before boat dispersal.[8]

>>

>> ## Release of solid carbon dioxide at depth[edit]

>>

>> Carbon dioxide ocean storage can occur through solid or solid hydrate of
carbon dioxide. The solid state density of carbon dioxide is approximately 1.5
times greater than seawater and thus tends to sink to the ocean floor. The
dissolving rate at the surface is about 0.2 cm/hr such that a small quantity
of carbon dioxide can be completely dissolved before reaching the sea
floor.[5] In addition to solid carbon dioxide injection, carbon dioxide
hydrate is another popular method for storage. Hydrate formation takes place
when the dissolved concentration of liquid carbon dioxide is around 30% and
400 meters below sea level. Hydrates form as an external layer around liquid
carbon dioxide droplets or as a solid mass.[9] The molecular composition is
composed of carbon dioxide and water, carbon dioxide•nH2O (n ≈ 5.75).[4] The
resulting density is denser than seawater by approximately 10%. Compared to
liquid carbon dioxide, the hydrate form dissolves significantly slower in
seawater, at about 0.2 cm/hr as well.[9] Additionally, the hydrate remains
immobile on the seafloor and forms hydrate cap, forcing liquid carbon dioxide
to only move laterally.[10] The overall molecular stability relies on the
temperature and pressure of the environment, and hydrates only dissociate when
placed in direct contact with additional heat and water at concentrations
below its equilibrium concentration.[11] However, due to its crystalline
structure, pure hydrate doesn't travel through pipes. Given that 100%
efficiency is extremely difficult to achieve, in reality, both laboratory and
field experiments suggest that sinking reaction efficiency is approximately
15-25%.[4] Any kind of instability of hydrates is likely to cause dissolution
and dispersion during the descending or injection process.[10]

>>

>> ## Mineralization and deep sea sediments[edit]

>>

>> Similar to mineralization processes that takes place within rocks,
mineralization can also occur under the sea. The rate of dissolution of carbon
dioxide from atmosphere to oceanic regions relies upon the circulation period
of the ocean and buffering ability of subducting surface water.[11] Researches
have demonstrated that the carbon dioxide marine storage at several kilometers
deep could be viable for up to 500 years, but is dependent on injection site
and conditions. Several studies have shown that although it may fix carbon
dioxide effect, carbon dioxide may be released back to the atmosphere over
time. However, this is unlikely for at least a few more centuries. The
neutralization of CaCO3, or balancing the concentration of CaCO3 on the
seafloor, land and in the ocean, can be measured on a timescale of thousands
of years. More specifically, the predicted time is 1700 years for ocean and
approximately 5000 to 6000 years for land.[12][13] Further, the dissolution
time for CaCo3 can be improved by injecting near or downstream of the storage
site.[14]

>>

>> In addition to carbon mineralization, another proposal is deep sea sediment
injection. It injects liquid carbon at least 3000 m below the surface directly
into ocean sediments to generate carbon dioxide hydrate. Two regions are
defined for exploration: the negative buoyancy zone (NBZ), which is the region
between liquid carbon dioxide denser than surrounding water and where liquid
carbon dioxide has neutral buoyancy, and hydrate formation zone (HFZ), which
typically has low temperatures and high pressures. Several research models
have shown that the optimal depth of injection requires consideration of
intrinsic permeability and any changes in liquid carbon dioxide permeability
for optimal storage. The formation of hydrates decreases liquid carbon dioxide
permeability, and injection below HFZ is more energetically favored than
within the HFZ. If the NBZ is a greater column of water than the HFZ, the
injection should happen below the HFZ and directly to the NBZ. In this case,
liquid carbon dioxide will sink to the NBZ and be stored below the buoyancy
and hydrate cap. Carbon dioxide leakage can occur if there is dissolution into
pore fluid or via molecular diffusion. However, this occurs over thousands of
years.[14][15][16]

>>

>> ## Carbon dioxide plumes[edit]

>>

>> Researchers have been able to show in lab and in small in situ experiments
that carbon dioxide can be injected into oceans as rising or sinking
plumes.[5] The plume will sink if it is more dense than seawater. This should
occur if the plume, a mix of carbon dioxide and seawater, is injected at
depths of 3 km.[4] As the plume moves vertically, it will dissolve at least
partially due to convective mass transfer with the passing seawater.
Dissolution is increased by increased currents perpendicular to the vertical
water column containing the plume because of the increase convective mass
transfer. For sinking plumes, minimal horizontal currents are desired so that
the plume can sink to the ocean floor for longer term sequestration. The
opposite is desired for rising plumes, which similarly to other previously
mentioned dilute ocean storage techniques, relies on the dispersal to make the
change in carbon dioxide concentration in the ocean low enough to not affect
the marine biosphere significantly.[17]

>>

>> The proposed method of injection is droplets of supercritical carbon
dioxide mixed with seawater. Plumes can be engineered to dissolve at different
rates based on the size, concentration, and rate of injection of the carbon
dioxide/seawater droplets. For rising plumes which rely on dissolution to
sequester carbon dioxide, a smaller droplet with a greater rate of injection
is better because it leads to faster dissolution. Sinking plumes ideally form
lakes of carbon dioxide on the ocean floor for more long term
sequestration.[5]

>>

>> ## Carbon dioxide lakes[edit]

>>

>> Carbon dioxide lakes will form on ocean floors in depressions or trenches
in the seabed. These lakes sequester carbon dioxide through isolation. The
deep ocean has a very slow rate of mixing with the surface ocean.
Additionally, the surface of the carbon dioxide lake will form a layer of
crystal hydrates that will slow dissolution of carbon dioxide into the above
ocean. Convective motion over the surface of the lake due to ocean bottom
storms or normal sea currents will increase dissolution. Without any bulk flow
over the lake, the storage timeline of the carbon dioxide is 10,000 years for
a 50 m deep lake. This number is decreased by more than 25 times with currents
from ocean bottom storms.[5]

>>

>> Sites would be chosen based on ocean floor depth, seismic and volcanic
activity, and the presence of CaCO3 deposits that could increase the rate of
carbon mineralization.[18] Some sites proposed for storage at depths greater
than 6 km include the Indonesian Sunda trench, the Japanese Ryukyu trench, and
the Puerto Rico trench.[11]

>>

>> ## Environmental impacts of deep-sea ocean sequestration[edit]

>>

>> Researchers are studying how ecosystems are affected before and after
injection of liquid carbon dioxide through "process studies, surveys of
biogeochemical tracers, and ocean bottom studies."[19] The challenge comes
from the spatial range of the ocean and the time-scale at which effects would
be taking place, making it difficult to detect these effects precisely.[20]
There is very limited knowledge as to what organisms and ecosystems exist in
this unexplored area and the interdependence of such ecosystems.[20] The
following is specifically pertaining to deep ocean sequestration through
dilute injection, but touches on alternate methods (injection by towed
pipeline, injection by stationary pipeline, use of hydrates). Due to the size
of the ocean, the predictions and conclusions regarding the environmental risk
of this sequestration process are based off small-scale experiments that have
been extrapolated to show possible results on a scale as large as the
ocean.[19]

>>

>> ### Deep sea biota[edit]

>>

>> Ocean sequestration in deep sea sediments has the potential to impact deep
sea life. The chemical and physical composition of the deep sea does not
undergo changes in the way that surface waters do.[19] Due to its limited
contact with the atmosphere, most organisms have evolved with very little
physical and chemical disturbance and exposed to minimal levels of carbon
dioxide.[19] Most of their energy is obtained from feeding off of particulate
matter that descends from the surface water of the ocean and its
ecosystems.[19] Deep sea ecosystems do not have rapid reproduction rates nor
give birth to many offspring because of their limited access to oxygen and
nutrients.[19] In particular, species that inhabit the 2000-3000m deep range
of the ocean have small, diverse populations.[19] Introducing lethal amounts
of carbon dioxide into the environment of such a species can have a serious
impact on the population size and will take longer to recover relative to
surface water species.[21]

>>

>> ### Effects of pH vs. carbon dioxide[edit]

>>

>> Acidification of the environment weakens metabolic processes in organisms;
enzymes and ion transportation require specific pH levels to continue
functioning properly.[19] However, organisms are not only affected by the
acidification of water in the presence of heightened carbon dioxide (carbon
dioxide) levels. carbon dioxide itself interacts with the physiological
function of individual organisms.[19] These effects are more damaging than
those associated with changes in pH of environment.[22] When carbon dioxide
enters organisms, through diffusion across tissue, it becomes internally
accumulated which can then cause anesthesia and, depending on the
concentration of carbon dioxide, death.[23] The internal accumulation will
also cause organisms to experience blood acidification. This weakens
organisms' ability to uptake oxygen and consequently weakens their
performances.[19] This effect is more so detrimental to more complex and
larger species that require a greater exertion of energy to move and perform
vital bodily functions.[19]

>>

>> ### Long term effects[edit]

>>

>> If deep-sea ocean sequestration becomes a common practice, long term
effects will continue to be investigated to predict future scenarios of deep
sea impacts by carbon dioxide.[21] Ocean sequestration of liquid carbon
dioxide would not only impact deep-sea ecosystems, but in the long-run would
begin to affect surface-water species.[21] It is estimated that organisms not
fit for high carbon dioxide levels will begin to experience permanent effects
at levels of 400/500ppm of carbon dioxide and/or shifts of 0.1-0.3 units in
pH.[19] These levels of carbon dioxide are predicted to be met solely as a
result of atmospheric carbon dioxide acidifying the surface waters over a
matter of a century, without considering ocean sequestration effects.[19]

>>

>> Although the long-term effects are the most relevant to understand, they
are also the most difficult to predict accurately due to the scale of the
ocean and the diversity in species sensitivity to elevated carbon dioxide
levels. Surface sea organisms have been better studied than deep-sea animals
in terms of consequences due to prolonged carbon dioxide exposure and have
been proven to experience "reduced calcification" and damage to their
skeletons.[19] This more seriously affects shelled animals' mortality and
growth rate.[19] Adult fish showed remarkable tolerance to elevated carbon
dioxide levels, only when dissolution of carbon dioxide occurred at a slow
rate.[21] Developing fish showed less tolerance than their adult fish
counterparts.[21] Acidification of the blood in these species also results in
weakened metabolic rates; this stunts protein formation and thus hinders
growth and reproduction of organisms.[19] Although individual physiological
effects are known, in order to understand how these individual species are
interconnected and dependent of each other, field studies would have to be
conducted. Different amounts and concentrations of sequestered carbon dioxide
will affect each ecosystem and species differently such that a general,
universal limit of carbon dioxide to be sequestered doesn't exist.[19]

>>

>> Corporations in favor of ocean sequestration, such as ExxonMobil,[24] argue
that the uncertainties involved with such predictions instill doubt in the
conclusions of the research. Supporters of ocean sequestration argue that
because of the ocean's size, diluted carbon dioxide injections will not be
enough to create an actual impact on ecosystems and that species can evolve to
these increased levels of carbon dioxide eventually.[19] Scientific research
shows that sites of injection are spatially specific and ecosystems that
happen to inhabit the site of injection can suffer immediate consequences.[22]
Affected areas will experience acidification, due to the augmented bicarbonate
levels, and in turn a decrease in calcium carbonate levels.[22] This will
cause sediments and shells of organisms to more quickly dissolve.[19] The
capacity of deep-sea organisms to acclimate to the injection of carbon dioxide
has not been investigated and the hypothesis that they will evolve in time
lacks scientific support.[19]

>>

>> ### Minimal impact methods[edit]

>>

>> The use of clathrate hydrates can be implemented in order to reduce speed
of dissolution of carbon dioxide.[25][20] The hydrates give carbon dioxide a
negative buoyancy, allowing injection to occur at surface levels rather than
through pipelines.[21] Experiments showed that the use of clathrate hydrates
minimized the rate at which the injected carbon dioxide spread throughout the
ocean floor.[26] This rate proved to minimize impact on deep sea
organisms.[25] The intactness of the hydrates relies heavily on the ocean
current's magnitude at the site of injection.[20] The carbon dioxide dissolved
into surface waters before the hydrate was able to sink to the deep ocean
(10%-55% of carbon dioxide remained stuck to the hydrate at depths of 1500m
into the ocean).[25] In laboratory experiments, continuous streams of hydrates
have not yet been achieved.[26]

>>

>> Studies show that delivering liquid carbon dioxide by a towed pipeline
(attached to boat traveling perpendicular to the current), can minimize
"clumps" of highly concentrated carbon dioxide levels. Delivery by fixed pipe
would be confined to a small region of the ocean and in turn instantly kill
sensitive species inhabiting the region. Theoretically, if we assume future
anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide drop drastically and only 0.37 Gt of
liquid carbon dioxide were to be injected each year through a towed pipe, only
1% of the ocean would be affected. There is consensus among scientists that
ocean sequestration of carbon dioxide is not a long-term plan to be relied on,
but may solve immediate atmospheric concerns if implemented temporarily.
Scientists believe that it is possible to engineer ways to discharge carbon
dioxide at rates that resemble the natural fluctuation of carbon dioxide in
the oceans.[26]

>>

>> ## Blue carbon capture in ocean[edit]

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/82/Carbon_cycle-

cute_diagram.svg/290px-Carbon_cycle-cute_diagram.svg.png)

>>

>> Carbon cycle diagram showing the exchange of carbon between the atmosphere,
hydrosphere, and geosphere.

>>

>> Ocean storage refers to the use of large water bodies and marine lifeforms
to capture carbon by exploiting natural and geological mechanisms. Oceans
cover slightly more than 70% of the total surface area of the Earth, and plays
a major role in helping to stabilize Earth's climate.[27] This presents itself
as a readily available carbon sink to store and capture atmospheric carbon
dioxide. Due to the solubility of carbon dioxide in water, CO2 naturally
dissolves in oceanic waters to form an equilibrium. With an increase in the
concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, the position of equilibrium
pushes the equilibrium in the direction such that more CO2 dissolves into the
water. Utilizing this mechanism, more than 500 Gtons of carbon dioxide
(amounting to a total of 140 Gtons of carbon) of anthropogenic carbon dioxide
emissions released over the past 2 centuries have been absorbed by the
oceans.[27] With increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations released due to
human activities as compared to levels before the Industrialization, oceans
are currently absorbing 7 Gt carbon dioxide per annum.[14] To enhance the
natural mechanism of CO2 dissolving in water, several methods have been
proposed by the scientific community. These include the use of iron
fertilization, urea fertilization, mixing layers, seaweed,[28] as well as
direct carbon injection into the sea floor.

>>

>> ## Iron fertilization[edit]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8e/Phytoplankton_bloom_off_the_coast_of_Scotland.jpg/280px-

Phytoplankton_bloom_off_the_coast_of_Scotland.jpg)

>>

>> An oceanic phytoplankton bloom in the North Sea off the coast of eastern
Scotland.

>>

>> ### Role of iron in carbon sequestration[edit]

>>

>> Ocean iron fertilization is an example of a geoengineering technique that
involves intentional introduction of iron-rich deposits into oceans and is
aimed to enhance biological productivity of organisms in ocean waters in order
to increase carbon dioxide (CO2) uptake from the atmosphere, possibly
resulting in mitigating its global warming effects.[29][30][31][32][33] Iron
is a trace element in ocean and its presence is vital for photosynthesis in
plants, and in particular phytoplanktons, as It has been shown that iron
deficiency can limit ocean productivity and phytoplankton growth.[34] For this
reason, “iron hypothesis” was put forward by Martin in late 1980s where he
suggested that changes in iron supply in iron-deficient ocean-waters can bloom
plankton growth and have a significant effect on the concentrations of
atmospheric carbon dioxide by altering rates of carbon sequestration.[35][36]
In fact, fertilization is an important process that occurs naturally in the
ocean waters. For instance, upwellings of ocean currents can bring nutrient-
rich sediments to the surface.[37] Another example is through transfer of
iron-rich minerals, dust, and volcanic ash over long distances by rivers,
glaciers, or wind.[38][39] Moreover, it has been suggested that whales can
transfer iron-rich ocean dust to the surface, where planktons can take it up
to grow. It has been shown that reduction in the number of sperm whales in the
Southern Ocean has resulted in a 200,000 tonnes/yr decrease in the atmospheric
carbon uptake, possibly due to limited phytoplankton growth.[40]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fb/CO2_pump_hg.svg/299px-

CO2_pump_hg.svg.png)

>>

>> Air-sea exchange of CO 2 {\displaystyle {\ce {CO2}}} ![{\\displaystyle

{\\ce

{CO2}}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/c3ed885c7553085f5d3a2bb0a63616656248699d)

>>

>> ### Carbon sequestration by phytoplankton[edit]

>>

>> Phytoplankton is photosynthetic, needing sunlight and nutrients to grow,
taking up carbon dioxide in the process. Plankton can take up and sequester
atmospheric carbon through generating calcium or silicon-carbonate skeletons.
When these organisms die they sink to the ocean floor where their carbonate
skeletons can form a major component of the carbon-rich deep sea
precipitation, thousands of meters below plankton blooms, known as marine
snow.[41][42][43] Nonetheless, based on the definition, carbon is only
considered "sequestered" when it is deposited in the ocean floor where it can
be retained for millions of years. However, most of the carbon-rich biomass
generated from plankton is generally consumed by other organisms (small fish,
zooplankton, etc.)[44][45] and substantial part of rest of the deposits that
sink beneath plankton blooms may be re-dissolved in the water and gets
transferred to the surface where it eventually returns to the atmosphere,
thus, nullifying any possible intended effects regarding carbon
sequestration.[46][47][48][49][50] Nevertheless, supporters of the idea of
iron fertilization believe that carbon sequestration should be re-defined over
much shorter time frames and claim that since the carbon is suspended in the
deep ocean it is effectively isolated from the atmosphere for hundreds of
years, and thus, carbon can be effectively sequestered.[51]

>>

>> ### Efficiency and concerns[edit]

>>

>> Assuming the ideal conditions, the upper estimates for possible effects of
iron fertilization in slowing down global warming is about 0.3W/m2 of averaged
negative forcing which can offset roughly 15-20% of the current anthropogenic
CO 2 {\displaystyle {\ce {CO2}}} ![{\\displaystyle {\\ce

{CO2}}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/c3ed885c7553085f5d3a2bb0a63616656248699d)emissions.[52][53][54]
However, although this approach could be looked upon as an alternative, easy
route, to solving our carbon emission crisis and lower concentration of CO 2
{\displaystyle {\ce {CO2}}} ![{\\displaystyle {\\ce

{CO2}}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/c3ed885c7553085f5d3a2bb0a63616656248699d)in
the atmosphere, ocean iron fertilization is still quite controversial and
highly debated due to possible negative consequences on the marine
ecosystem.[47][55][56][57] Research on this area has suggested that
fertilization through deposition of large quantities of iron-rich dust into
the ocean floor can significantly disrupt ocean's nutrient balance and cause
major complications in the food cycle for other marine
organisms.[58][59][60][61][62][63][64] Since 1990, 13 major large scale
experiments have been carried out to evaluate efficiency and possible
consequences of the iron fertilization in ocean waters. A recent research
conducted on these experiments determined that the method is unproven;
sequestering efficiency is low and sometimes no effect was seen and the amount
of iron deposits that is needed to make a small cut in the carbon emissions is
in the million tons per year.[65]

>>

>> ## Urea fertilization[edit]

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/88/Coral_reef_in_Tubbataha_Natural_Park.jpg/214px-

Coral_reef_in_Tubbataha_Natural_Park.jpg)

>>

>> According to Ramsay et al.,[66] urea fertilization could cause damage to
the rich marine biodiversity of the Sulu sea (including its coral reefs).

>>

>> In waters with sufficient iron micro nutrients, but a deficit of nitrogen,
urea fertilization is the better choice for algae growt.[67] Urea is the most
used fertilizer in the world, due to its high content of nitrogen, low cost
and high reactivity towards water.[22] When exposed to ocean waters, urea is
metabolized by phytoplankton via urease enzymes to produce ammonia.[68] CO (
NH 2 ) 2 + H 2 O -> u r e a s e NH 3 + NH 2 COOH {\displaystyle {\ce
{CO(NH_2)_2 + H_2O ->[urease] NH_3 + NH_2COOH}}} ![{\\displaystyle {\\ce

{CO\(NH_2\)_2 + H_2O ->\[urease\] NH_3 +

NH_2COOH}}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/24db38a8a826ae88250bc0b635c526b74d39e0c2)

>>

>> NH 2 COOH + H 2 O ⟶ NH 3 + H 2 CO 3 {\displaystyle {\ce {NH_2COOH + H_2O ->
NH_3 + H_2CO_3}}} ![{\\displaystyle {\\ce {NH_2COOH + H_2O -> NH_3 +

H_2CO_3}}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/c0527db0a159662b45187f0ebcce1986266eb445)

>>

>> The intermediate product carbamate also reacts with water to produce a
total of two ammonia molecules.[23] In 2007 the 'Ocean Nourishment Corporation
of Sydney' initiated an experiment in the Sulu sea (southwest of the
Philippines), were 1000 tons of urea was injected into the ocean.[22] The goal
was to prove that urea fertilization would enrich the algae growth in the
ocean, and thereby capture CO2 from the atmosphere. This project was
criticized by many institutions, including the European Commission,[69] due to
lack of knowledge of side effects on the marine ecosystem.[66] Results from
this project are still to be published in literature. Another cause of concern
is the sheer amount of urea needed to capture the same amount of carbon as eq.
iron fertilization. The nitrogen to iron ratio in a typical algae cell is
16:0.0001, meaning that for every iron atom added to the ocean a substantial
larger amount of carbon is captured compared to adding one atom of
nitrogen.[5] Scientists also emphasize that adding urea to ocean waters could
reduce oxygen content and result in a rise of toxic marine algae.[5] This
could potentially have devastating effects on fish populations, which others
argue would be benefiting from the urea fertilization (the argument being that
fish populations would feed on healthy phytoplankton.[70]

>>

>> ## Seaweed fertilization[edit]

>>

>> In order to mitigate global warming, seaweed farming is both a possible and
plausible way. This method was adopted in early ocean algae proposals to
mitigate global warming. This is done through commercial kelp farms designed
to take up tens of thousands of square kilometres of the open ocean.[71]
Through this method, seaweed beds will perform as an effective sinks by
decreasing the level of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) in the ocean.

>>

>>
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/19/Seaweed_in_Ensenada_Baja_California.jpg/280px-

Seaweed_in_Ensenada_Baja_California.jpg)

>>

>> Seaweed in Ensenada, Baja California.

>>

>> Seaweeds do the above by removing carbon through the process of
photosynthesis, taking in excess CO2 and producing O2. Facts and figures have
shown that 0.7 million tonnes of carbon are removed from the sea each year by
commercially harvested seaweeds.[72] Even though seaweed biomass is small as
compared to the coastal region. They remain essential due to their biotic
components, the ability to provide valuable ecosystem services and high
primary productivity. Seaweeds are different from mangroves and seagrasses,
they are photosynthetic algal organisms[73] and non-flowering. Even so, they
are primary producers that grows in the same way as their terrestrial
counterparts, both of which assimilate carbon by the process of photosynthesis
and generates new biomass by taking up phosphorus, nitrogen, and other
minerals.

>>

>> The attractiveness of large-scale seaweed cultivation is proven over the
years, with low-cost technologies and the multiple uses that can be made of
its products. Today, seaweed farming made up approximately 25% of the world's
aquaculture production and its maximum potential has not been utilised.[74]

>>

>> Currently in the world,seaweeds contributes approximately 16–18.7% of the
total marine-vegetation sink. In 2010 there are 19.2 × 10 6 {\displaystyle
10^{6}}
![10^{6}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/3ffb66117ef0a7ccf37efe85652c7b3e829f32fb)
tons of aquatic plants worldwide, 6.8 × 10 6 {\displaystyle 10^{6}}
![10^{6}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/3ffb66117ef0a7ccf37efe85652c7b3e829f32fb)
tons for brown seaweeds; 9.0 × 10 6 {\displaystyle 10^{6}}
![10^{6}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/3ffb66117ef0a7ccf37efe85652c7b3e829f32fb)
tons for red seaweeds; 0.2 × 10 6 {\displaystyle 10^{6}}
![10^{6}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/3ffb66117ef0a7ccf37efe85652c7b3e829f32fb)
tons of green seaweeds; and 3.2 × 10 6 {\displaystyle 10^{6}}
![10^{6}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/3ffb66117ef0a7ccf37efe85652c7b3e829f32fb)
tons of miscellaneous aquatic plants.There is an estimations of 1000 tons of
carbon is temporarily sequestered in the ocean, making the sea as an important
carbon sink.[75]

>>

>> ## Mixing layers[edit]

>>

>> Mixing layers involve transporting the denser and colder deep ocean water
to the surface mixed layer. As the temperature of water in the ocean decreases
with depth, more carbon dioxide and other compounds are able to dissolve in
the deeper layers.[76] This can be induced by reversing the oceanic carbon
cycle through the use of large vertical pipes serving as ocean pumps,[77] or a
mixer array.[78] When the nutrient rich deep ocean water is moved to the
surface, algae bloom occurs, resulting in a decrease in carbon dioxide due to
carbon intake from Phytoplankton and other photosynthetic eukaryotic
organisms. The transfer of heat between the layers will also cause seawater
from the mixed layer to sink and absorb more carbon dioxide. This method has
not gained much traction as algae bloom harms marine ecosystems by blocking
sunlight and releasing harmful toxins into the ocean.[79] The sudden increase
in carbon dioxide on the surface level will also temporarily decrease the pH
of the seawater, impairing the growth of coral reefs. The production of
carbonic acid through the dissolution of carbon dioxide in seawater hinders
marine biogenic calcification and causes major disruptions to the oceanic food
chain.[80]

>>

>> ## References[edit]

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. **^** Marchetti, Cesare (March
1977). "On geoengineering and

>>  
>>

>> the CO2 problem". _Climatic Change_. **1** (1): 59–68.
Bibcode:1977ClCh....1...59M. doi:10.1007/bf00162777. ISSN 0165-0009.

>>  
>>                 >>                       2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Rackley,
Stephen A. (2010), "Ocean Storage",

>>  
>>

>> _Carbon Capture and Storage_ , Elsevier, pp. 267–286,
doi:10.1016/b978-1-85617-636-1.00012-2, ISBN 9781856176361, retrieved
2018-12-04

>>  
>>                 >>                       3. **^** "The Earth's Carbon
Reservoirs". _earthguide.ucsd.edu_.

>>  
>>

>> Retrieved 2018-12-04.

>>  
>>                 >>                       4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ _**e**_ Adams, E. Eric, and

>>  
>>

>> Ken Caldeira. “Ocean Storage of CO2.” _Elements_ , vol. 4, October 2008,
pp. 319–324., doi:10.2113/gselements.4.5.319.

>>  
>>                 >>                       5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_

>>  
>>

>> _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ Caldeira, Ken, et al. “IPCC Special Report
on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage: Ocean Storage.” International Panel on
Climate Change, 2005.

>>  
>>                 >>                       6. **^** Paul, Pruess. "Climate
Change Scenarios Compel Studies of

>>  
>>

>> Ocean Carbon Storage". _lbl.gov_. Berkeley Lab.

>>  
>>                 >>                       7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Herzog,
Howard; Caldeira, Ken; Adams, Eric.

>>  
>>

>> "Carbon Sequestration via Direct Injection" (PDF). MIT.

>>  
>>                 >>                       8. **^** "Ocean Storage of CO2"
(PDF). _ieaghg.org_. IEA

>>  
>>

>> Greenhouse Gas R &D Programme.

>>  
>>                 >>                       9. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ ROCHELLE, C.
(2003). "CO2 HYDRATE AND

>>  
>>

>> UNDERGROUND STORAGE" (PDF). _Published Thesis_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Capron, Mark
(July 26, 2013). "Secure

>>  
>>

>> Seafloor Storage CO2 Storage" (PDF). _Published Thesis_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
Goldthorpe, Steve (2017-07-01).

>>  
>>

>> "Potential for Very Deep Ocean Storage of CO2 Without Ocean Acidification:
A Discussion Paper". _Energy Procedia_. **114** : 5417–5429.
doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2017.03.1686. ISSN 1876-6102.

>>  
>>                 >>                       12. **^** House, Kurt (November
10, 2005). "Permanent carbon

>>  
>>

>> dioxide storage in deep-sea sediments" (PDF). _Applied Physical Sciences_.
**103** (33): 12291–12295. Bibcode:2006PNAS..10312291H.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0605318103. PMC 1567873. PMID 16894174.

>>  
>>                 >>                       13. **^** RIDGWELL, ANDY
(2007-01-13). "Regulation of atmospheric

>>  
>>

>> CO2 by deep-sea sediments in an Earth System Model" (PDF). _Global
Biogeochemical Cycles_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-

>>  
>>

>> reports/srccs/srccs_chapter6.pdf

>>  
>>                 >>                       15. **^** Qanbari, Farhad;
Pooladi-Darvish, Mehran; Tabatabaie, S.

>>  
>>

>> Hamed; Gerami, Shahab (2012-09-01). "CO2 disposal as hydrate in ocean
sediments". _Journal of Natural Gas Science and Engineering_. **8** : 139–149.
doi:10.1016/j.jngse.2011.10.006. ISSN 1875-5100.

>>  
>>                 >>                       16. **^** Zhang, Dongxiao; Teng,
Yihua (2018-07-01). "Long-term

>>  
>>

>> viability of carbon sequestration in deep-sea sediments". _Science
Advances_. **4** (7): eaao6588. Bibcode:2018SciA....4O6588T.
doi:10.1126/sciadv.aao6588. ISSN 2375-2548. PMC 6031374. PMID 29978037.

>>  
>>                 >>                       17. **^** Alendal, Guttorm;
Drange, Helge (2001-01-15). "Two-

>>  
>>

>> phase, near-field modeling of purposefully released CO2in the ocean".
_Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans_. **106** (C1): 1085–1096.
Bibcode:2001JGR...106.1085A. doi:10.1029/1999jc000290. ISSN 0148-0227.

>>  
>>                 >>                       18. **^** Bullis, Kevin. "Storing
Carbon Dioxide under the Ocean".

>>  
>>

>> _MIT Technology Review_. Retrieved 2018-12-03.

>>  
>>                 >>                       19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_

>>  
>>

>> _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ _**k**_ _**l**_ _**m**_ _**n**_ _**o**_ _**p**_
_**q**_ _**r**_ _**s**_ _**t**_ IPCC, 2005: IPCC Special Report on Carbon
Dioxide Capture and Storage. Prepared by Working Group III of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Metz, B., O. Davidson, H. C. de
Coninck, M. Loos, and L. A. Meyer (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 442 pp.

>>  
>>                 >>                       20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ Santillo, David., Johnston,

>>  
>>

>> Paul. (3 December 2018). "Carbon Capture and Sequestration: Potential
Environmental Impacts". CiteSeerX 10.1.1.577.6246.

>>  
>>                 >>                       21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ Israelsson,

>>  
>>

>> Peter H.; Chow, Aaron C.; Eric Adams, E. (2009). "An updated assessment of
the acute impacts of ocean carbon sequestration by direct injection". _Energy
Procedia_. **1** : 4929–4936. doi:10.1016/j.egypro.2009.02.324.

>>  
>>                 >>                       22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
_**d**_ _**e**_ Azeem, Babar;

>>  
>>

>> KuShaari, KuZilati; Man, Zakaria B.; Basit, Abdul; Thanh, Trinh H. (May
2014). "Review on materials & methods to produce controlled release coated
urea fertilizer". _Journal of Controlled Release_. **181** : 11–21.
doi:10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.02.020. ISSN 0168-3659. PMID 24593892.

>>  
>>                 >>                       23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Kugino,
Kenji; Tamaru, Shizuka; Hisatomi,

>>  
>>

>> Yuko; Sakaguchi, Tadashi (2016-04-21). "Long-Duration Carbon Dioxide
Anesthesia of Fish Using Ultra Fine (Nano-Scale) Bubbles". _PLOS ONE_. **11**
(4): e0153542. Bibcode:2016PLoSO..1153542K. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0153542.
ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 4839645. PMID 27100285.

>>  
>>                 >>                       24. **^** Supran, Geoffrey.
Oreskes, Naomi "Assessing ExxonMobil's

>>  
>>

>> climate change communications" _Environmental Research Letters._
(1977-2014) (http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/12/8/084019)

>>  
>>                 >>                       25. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
Brewer, Peter G. "Direct Injection

>>  
>>

>> of Carbon Dioxide into the Oceans." _The Carbon Dioxide Dilemma: Promising
Technlogoies and Policies._ (2003)

>>  
>>                 >>                       26. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
Israelsson, Peter. Chow, Aaron.

>>  
>>

>> Adams, Eric. "An updated assessment of the acute impacts of ocean carbon
sequestration by direct injection." _Energy Procedia._
2009https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2009.02.324

>>  
>>                 >>                       27. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "6. Could
CO2 be stored in the deep ocean?".

>>  
>>                       28. **^** De Vooys, 1979; Raven and Falkowski, 1999;
Falkowski et

>>  
>>

>> al., 2000; Pelejero et al., 2010

>>  
>>                 >>                       29. **^** Traufetter, Gerald
(2009-01-02). "Cold Carbon Sink:

>>  
>>

>> Slowing Global Warming with Antarctic Iron". _Spiegel Online_. Retrieved
2018-11-18.

>>  
>>                 >>                       30. **^** Jin, X.; Gruber, N.;
Frenzel, H.; Doney, S. C.;

>>  
>>

>> McWilliams, J. C. (2008-03-18). "The impact on atmospheric CO2 of iron
fertilization induced changes in the ocean's biological pump".
_Biogeosciences_. **5** (2): 385–406. doi:10.5194/bg-5-385-2008. ISSN
1726-4170.

>>  
>>                 >>                       31. **^** "No Title". _www-
formal.stanford.edu_. Retrieved

>>  
>>

>> 2018-11-18.

>>  
>>                 >>                       32. **^** Martínez-García,
Alfredo; Sigman, Daniel M.; Ren,

>>  
>>

>> Haojia; Anderson, Robert F.; Straub, Marietta; Hodell, David A.; Jaccard,
Samuel L.; Eglinton, Timothy I.; Haug, Gerald H. (2014-03-21). "Iron
Fertilization of the Subantarctic Ocean During the Last Ice Age". _Science_.
**343** (6177): 1347–1350. Bibcode:2014Sci...343.1347M.
doi:10.1126/science.1246848. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 24653031.

>>  
>>                 >>                       33. **^** Pasquier, Benoît;
Holzer, Mark (2018-08-16). "Iron

>>  
>>

>> fertilization efficiency and the number of past and future regenerations of
iron in the ocean". _Biogeosciences Discussions_. **15** (23): 7177–7203.
doi:10.5194/bg-2018-379. ISSN 1726-4170.

>>  
>>                 >>                       34. **^** Boyd, Philip W.; Watson,
Andrew J.; Law, Cliff S.;

>>  
>>

>> Abraham, Edward R.; Trull, Thomas; Murdoch, Rob; Bakker, Dorothee C. E.;
Bowie, Andrew R.; Buesseler, K. O. (October 2000). "A mesoscale phytoplankton
bloom in the polar Southern Ocean stimulated by iron fertilization". _Nature_.
**407** (6805): 695–702. Bibcode:2000Natur.407..695B. doi:10.1038/35037500.
ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 11048709.

>>  
>>                 >>                       35. **^** Boyd, P. W.; Jickells,
T.; Law, C. S.; Blain, S.; Boyle,

>>  
>>

>> E. A.; Buesseler, K. O.; Coale, K. H.; Cullen, J. J.; Baar, H. J. W. de
(2007-02-02). "Mesoscale Iron Enrichment Experiments 1993-2005: Synthesis and
Future Directions". _Science_. **315** (5812): 612–617.
Bibcode:2007Sci...315..612B. doi:10.1126/science.1131669. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID
17272712.

>>  
>>                 >>                       36. **^** "John Martin".
_earthobservatory.nasa.gov_. 2001-07-10.

>>  
>>

>> Retrieved 2018-11-19.

>>  
>>                 >>                       37. **^** Ian, Salter; Ralf,
Schiebel; Patrizia, Ziveri; Aurore,

>>  
>>

>> Movellan; S., Lampitt, Richard; A., Wolff, George (2015-02-23). "Carbonate
counter pump stimulated by natural iron fertilization in the Southern Ocean".
_epic.awi.de_ (in German). Retrieved 2018-11-19.

>>  
>>                 >>                       38. **^** "Wayback Machine" (PDF).
2007-11-29. Retrieved

>>  
>>

>> 2018-11-19.

>>  
>>                 >>                       39. **^** Hodson, Andy; Nowak,
Aga; Sabacka, Marie; Jungblut,

>>  
>>

>> Anne; Navarro, Francisco; Pearce, David; Ávila-Jiménez, María Luisa;
Convey, Peter; Vieira, Gonçalo (2017-02-15). "Climatically sensitive transfer
of iron to maritime Antarctic ecosystems by surface runoff". _Nature
Communications_. **8** : 14499. Bibcode:2017NatCo...814499H.
doi:10.1038/ncomms14499. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 5316877. PMID 28198359.

>>  
>>                 >>                       40. **^** Lavery, Trish J.;
Roudnew, Ben; Gill, Peter; Seymour,

>>  
>>

>> Justin; Seuront, Laurent; Johnson, Genevieve; Mitchell, James G.; Smetacek,
Victor (2010-11-22). "Iron defecation by sperm whales stimulates carbon export
in the Southern Ocean". _Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B:
Biological Sciences_. **277** (1699): 3527–3531. doi:10.1098/rspb.2010.0863.
ISSN 0962-8452. PMC 2982231. PMID 20554546.

>>  
>>                 >>                       41. **^** J., Brooks; K.,
Shamberger; B., Roark, E.; K., Miller;

>>  
>>

>> A., Baco-Taylor (February 2016). "Seawater Carbonate Chemistry of Deep-sea
Coral Beds off the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands". **2016** : AH23A–03.
Bibcode:2016AGUOSAH23A..03B.

>>  
>>                 >>                       42. **^** Laurenceau-Cornec,
Emmanuel C.; Trull, Thomas W.;

>>  
>>

>> Davies, Diana M.; Rocha, Christina L. De La; Blain, Stéphane (2015-02-03).
"Phytoplankton morphology controls on marine snow sinking velocity". _Marine
Ecology Progress Series_. **520** : 35–56. Bibcode:2015MEPS..520...35L.
doi:10.3354/meps11116. ISSN 0171-8630.

>>  
>>                 >>                       43. **^** Prairie, Jennifer C.;
Ziervogel, Kai; Camassa, Roberto;

>>  
>>

>> McLaughlin, Richard M.; White, Brian L.; Dewald, Carolin; Arnosti, Carol
(2015-10-20). "Delayed settling of marine snow: Effects of density gradient
and particle properties and implications for carbon cycling". _Marine
Chemistry_. **175** : 28–38. doi:10.1016/j.marchem.2015.04.006. ISSN
0304-4203.

>>  
>>                 >>                       44. **^** Steinberg, Deborah K.;
Landry, Michael R. (2017-01-03).

>>  
>>

>> "Zooplankton and the Ocean Carbon Cycle". _Annual Review of Marine
Science_. **9** (1): 413–444. Bibcode:2017ARMS....9..413S.
doi:10.1146/annurev- marine-010814-015924. ISSN 1941-1405. PMID 27814033.

>>  
>>                 >>                       45. **^** Cavan, Emma L.; Henson,
Stephanie A.; Belcher, Anna;

>>  
>>

>> Sanders, Richard (2017-01-12). "Role of zooplankton in determining the
efficiency of the biological carbon pump". _Biogeosciences_. **14** (1):
177–186. Bibcode:2017BGeo...14..177C. doi:10.5194/bg-14-177-2017. ISSN
1726-4189.

>>  
>>                 >>                       46. **^** Robinson, J.; Popova, E.
E.; Yool, A.; Srokosz, M.;

>>  
>>

>> Lampitt, R. S.; Blundell, J. R. (2014-04-11). "How deep is deep enough?
Ocean iron fertilization and carbon sequestration in the Southern Ocean".
_Geophysical Research Letters_. **41** (7): 2489–2495.
Bibcode:2014GeoRL..41.2489R. doi:10.1002/2013gl058799. ISSN 0094-8276.

>>  
>>                 >>                       47. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hauck,
Judith; Köhler, Peter; Wolf-Gladrow,

>>  
>>

>> Dieter; Völker, Christoph (2016). "Iron fertilisation and century-scale
effects of open ocean dissolution of olivine in a simulated CO 2 removal
experiment". _Environmental Research Letters_. **11** (2): 024007.
Bibcode:2016ERL....11b4007H. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/2/024007. ISSN
1748-9326.

>>  
>>                 >>                       48. **^** Tremblay, Luc; Caparros,
Jocelyne; Leblanc, Karine;

>>  
>>

>> Obernosterer, Ingrid (2014). "Origin and fate of particulate and dissolved
organic matter in a naturally iron-fertilized region of the Southern Ocean".
_Biogeosciences_. **12** (2).

>>  
>>                 >>                       49. **^** Arrhenius, Gustaf;
Mojzsis, Stephen; Atkinson, A.;

>>  
>>

>> Fielding, S.; Venables, H. J.; Waluda, C. M.; Achterberg, E. P.
(2016-10-10). "Zooplankton Gut Passage Mobilizes Lithogenic Iron for Ocean
Productivity". _Current Biology_. **26** (19): 2667–2673.
Bibcode:1996CBio....6.1213A. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.058. ISSN 0960-9822.
PMID 27641768.

>>  
>>                 >>                       50. **^** Vinay, Subhas, Adam
(2017). "Chemical Controls on the

>>  
>>

>> Dissolution Kinetics of Calcite in Seawater". California Institute of
Technology. doi:10.7907/z93x84p3.

>>  
>>                 >>                       51. **^** Jackson, R. B.;
Canadell, J. G.; Fuss, S.; Milne, J.;

>>  
>>

>> Nakicenovic, N.; Tavoni, M. (2017). "Focus on negative emissions".
_Environmental Research Letters_. **12** (11): 110201.
Bibcode:2017ERL....12k0201J. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa94ff. ISSN 1748-9326.

>>  
>>                 >>                       52. **^** Lenton, T. M.; Vaughan,
N. E. (2009-01-28). "The

>>  
>>

>> radiative forcing potential of different climate geoengineering options".
_Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics Discussions_. **9** (1): 2559–2608.
doi:10.5194/acpd-9-2559-2009. ISSN 1680-7375.

>>  
>>                 >>                       53. **^** [1], "Process and method
for the enhancement of

>>  
>>

>> sequestering atmospheric carbon through ocean iron fertilization, and
method for calculating net carbon capture from said process and method",
issued 2016-07-28

>>  
>>                 >>                       54. **^** Gattuso, J.-P.; Magnan,
A.; Billé, R.; Cheung, W. W. L.;

>>  
>>

>> Howes, E. L.; Joos, F.; Allemand, D.; Bopp, L.; Cooley, S. R. (2015-07-03).
"Contrasting futures for ocean and society from different anthropogenic CO2
emissions scenarios". _Science_. **349** (6243): aac4722.
doi:10.1126/science.aac4722. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 26138982.

>>  
>>                 >>                       55. **^** El-Jendoubi, Hamdi;
Vázquez, Saúl; Calatayud, Ángeles;

>>  
>>

>> Vavpetič, Primož; Vogel-Mikuš, Katarina; Pelicon, Primoz; Abadía, Javier;
Abadía, Anunciación; Morales, Fermín (2014). "The effects of foliar
fertilization with iron sulfate in chlorotic leaves are limited to the treated
area. A study with peach trees (Prunus persica L. Batsch) grown in the field
and sugar beet (Beta vulgaris L.) grown in hydroponics". _Frontiers in Plant
Science_. **5** : 2. doi:10.3389/fpls.2014.00002. ISSN 1664-462X. PMC 3895801.
PMID 24478782.

>>  
>>                 >>                       56. **^** Yoon, Joo-Eun; Yoo, Kyu-
Cheul; Macdonald, Alison M.;

>>  
>>

>> Yoon, Ho-Il; Park, Ki-Tae; Yang, Eun Jin; Kim, Hyun-Cheol; Lee, Jae Il;
Lee, Min Kyung (2018-10-05). "Reviews and syntheses: Ocean iron fertilization
experiments – past, present, and future looking to a future Korean Iron
Fertilization Experiment in the Southern Ocean (KIFES) project".
_Biogeosciences_. **15** (19): 5847–5889. Bibcode:2018BGeo...15.5847Y.
doi:10.5194/bg-15-5847-2018. ISSN 1726-4189.

>>  
>>                 >>                       57. **^** Gim, Byeong-Mo; Hong,
Seongjin; Lee, Jung-Suk; Kim, Nam-

>>  
>>

>> Hyun; Kwon, Eun-Mi; Gil, Joon-Woo; Lim, Hyun-Hwa; Jeon, Eui-Chan; Khim,
Jong Seong (2018-10-01). "Potential ecotoxicological effects of elevated
bicarbonate ion concentrations on marine organisms". _Environmental
Pollution_. **241** : 194–199. doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2018.05.057. ISSN
0269-7491. PMID 29807279.

>>  
>>                 >>                       58. **^** Traufetter, Gerald
(2009-01-02). "Cold Carbon Sink:

>>  
>>

>> Slowing Global Warming with Antarctic Iron". _Spiegel Online_. Retrieved
2018-11-19.

>>  
>>                 >>                       59. **^** "Reuters AlertNet - RPT-
FEATURE-Scientists urge caution

>>  
>>

>> in ocean-CO2 capture schemes". 2009-08-03. Retrieved 2018-11-19.

>>  
>>                 >>                       60. **^** "WWF condemns Planktos
Inc. iron-seeding plan in the

>>  
>>

>> Galapagos". _Geoengineering Monitor_. 2007-06-27. Retrieved 2018-11-19.

>>  
>>                 >>                       61. **^** "The Global, Complex
Phenomena of Harmful Algal Blooms |

>>  
>>

>> Oceanography". _tos.org_. Retrieved 2018-11-19.

>>  
>>                 >>                       62. **^** Moore, J.Keith; Doney,
Scott C; Glover, David M; Fung,

>>  
>>

>> Inez Y (2001). "Iron cycling and nutrient-limitation patterns in surface
waters of the World Ocean". _Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in
Oceanography_. **49** (1–3): 463–507. Bibcode:2001DSRII..49..463M.
doi:10.1016/S0967-0645(01)00109-6. ISSN 0967-0645.

>>  
>>                 >>                       63. **^** Trick, Charles G.; Bill,
Brian D.; Cochlan, William P.;

>>  
>>

>> Wells, Mark L.; Trainer, Vera L.; Pickell, Lisa D. (2010-03-30). "Iron
enrichment stimulates toxic diatom production in high-nitrate, low-chlorophyll
areas". _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_. **107** (13):
5887–5892. Bibcode:2010PNAS..107.5887T. doi:10.1073/pnas.0910579107. ISSN
0027-8424. PMC 2851856. PMID 20231473.

>>  
>>                 >>                       64. **^** Fripiat, F.; Elskens,
M.; Trull, T. W.; Blain, S.;

>>  
>>

>> Cavagna, A. -J.; Fernandez, C.; Fonseca-Batista, D.; Planchon, F.;
Raimbault, P. (November 2015). "Significant mixed layer nitrification in a
natural iron- fertilized bloom of the Southern Ocean". _Global Biogeochemical
Cycles_. **29** (11): 1929–1943. Bibcode:2015GBioC..29.1929F.
doi:10.1002/2014gb005051. ISSN 0886-6236.

>>  
>>                 >>                       65. **^** Tollefson, Jeff
(2017-05-23). "Iron-dumping ocean

>>  
>>

>> experiment sparks controversy". _Nature_. **545** (7655): 393–394.
Bibcode:2017Natur.545..393T. doi:10.1038/545393a. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID
28541342.

>>  
>>                 >>                       66. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Mayo-Ramsay,
Julia (September 2010).

>>  
>>

>> "Environmental, legal and social implications of ocean urea fertilization:
Sulu sea example". _Marine Policy_. **34** (5): 831–835.
doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2010.01.004. ISSN 0308-597X.

>>  
>>                 >>                       67. **^** Mingyuan, Glibert,
Patricia M. Azanza, Rhodora Burford,

>>  
>>

>> Michele Furuya, Ken Abal, Eva Al-Azri, Adnan Al-Yamani, Faiza Andersen, Per
Anderson, Donald M. Beardall, John Berg, Gry M. Brand, Larry E. Bronk, Deborah
Brookes, Justin Burkholder, JoAnn M. Cembella, Allan D. Cochlan, William P.
Collier, Jackie L. Collos, Yves Diaz, Robert Doblin, Martina Drennen, Thomas
Dyhrman, Sonya T. Fukuyo, Yasuwo Furnas, Miles Galloway, James Graneli, Edna
Ha, Dao Viet Hallegraeff, Gustaaf M. Harrison, John A. Harrison, Paul J. Heil,
Cynthia A. Heimann, Kirsten Howarth, Robert W. Jauzein, Cecile Kana, Austin A.
Kana, Todd M. Kim, Hakgyoon Kudela, Raphael M. Legrand, Catherine Mallin,
Michael Mulholland, Margaret R. Murray, Shauna A. O’Neil, Judith Pitcher,
Grant C. Qi, Yuzao Rabalais, Nancy Raine, Robin Seitzinger, Sybil P. Salomon,
Paulo S. Solomon, Caroline Stoecker, Diane K. Usup, Gires Wilson, Joanne Yin,
Kedong Zhou, Mingjiang Zhu (2008-08-14). _Ocean urea fertilization for carbon
credits poses high ecological risks_. OCLC 1040066339.

>>  
>>                 >>                       68. **^** Collins, Carleen M.;
D'Orazio, Sarah E. F. (September

>>  
>>

>> 1993). "Bacterial ureases: structure, regulation of expression and role in
pathogenesis". _Molecular Microbiology_. **9** (5): 907–913.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.1993.tb01220.x. ISSN 0950-382X.

>>  
>>                 >>                       69. **^** El-Geziry, T M; Bryden,
I G (January 2010). "The

>>  
>>

>> circulation pattern in the Mediterranean Sea: issues for modeller
consideration". _Journal of Operational Oceanography_. **3** (2): 39–46.
doi:10.1080/1755876x.2010.11020116. ISSN 1755-876X.

>>  
>>                 >>                       70. **^** Jones, Ian S.F.;
Cappelen-Smith, Christian (1999),

>>  
>>

>> "Lowring the cost of carbon sequestration by ocean nourishment",
_Greenhouse Gas Control Technologies 4_ , Elsevier, pp. 255–259,
doi:10.1016/b978-008043018-8/50041-2, ISBN 9780080430188

>>  
>>                 >>                       71. **^** "Installing kelp
forests/seaweed beds for mitigation and

>>  
>>

>> adaptation against global warming: Korean Project Overview". _ICES Journal
of Marine Science_. Retrieved 1 December 2018.

>>  
>>                 >>                       72. **^** "Seaweeds and their role
in globally changing

>>  
>>

>> environments". Retrieved 1 December 2018.

>>  
>>                 >>                       73. **^** "Seaweeds: Plants or
Algae?". _Point Reyes National

>>  
>>

>> Seashore Association_. Retrieved 1 December 2018.

>>  
>>                 >>                       74. **^** "The State Of World
Fisheries and Aquaculture" (PDF).

>>  
>>

>> _Food and Agriculture Organisation of United Nations_. Retrieved 1 December
2018.

>>  
>>                 >>                       75. **^** "ICES Journal of Marine
Science (2013)" (PDF). _ICES_.

>>  
>>

>> Retrieved 1 December 2018.

>>  
>>                 >>                       76. **^** "Ocean temperature".
_Science Learning Hub_. Retrieved

>>  
>>

>> 2018-11-28.

>>  
>>                 >>                       77. **^** Pearce, Fred. "Ocean
pumps could counter global

>>  
>>

>> warming". _New Scientist_. Retrieved 2018-11-28.

>>  
>>                 >>                       78. **^** Duke, John H. (2008). "A
proposal to force vertical

>>  
>>

>> mixing of the Pacific Equatorial Undercurrent to create a system of
equatorially trapped coupled convection that counteracts global warming"
(PDF). _Geophysical Research Abstracts_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       79. **^** EPA,OW,OWOW, US
(2013-06-03). "Harmful Algal Blooms | US

>>  
>>

>> EPA". _US EPA_. Retrieved 2018-11-28.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors
list (link)

>>  
>>                 >>                       80. **^** Shirley, Jolene S.
"Discovering the Effects of Carbon

>>  
>>

>> Dioxide Levels on Marine Life and Global Climate". _soundwaves.usgs.gov_.
Retrieved 2018-11-28.

>>

>> ![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

>>

>> Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ocean_storage_of_carbon_dioxide&oldid=900697736"

>>

>> Categories:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Carbon capture and sequestration

>>  
>>

>> Hidden categories:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CS1 German-language sources (de)

>>  
>>                       * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list

>>  
>>

>> ## Navigation menu

>>

>> ### Personal tools

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Not logged in

>>  
>>                       * Talk

>>  
>>                       * Contributions

>>  
>>                       * Create account

>>  
>>                       * Log in

>>  
>>

>> ### Namespaces

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Article

>>  
>>                       * Talk

>>  
>>

>> ### Variants

>>

>> ### Views

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Read

>>  
>>                       * Edit

>>  
>>                       * View history

>>  
>>

>> ### More

>>

>> ### Search

>>

>> ### Navigation

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Main page

>>  
>>                       * Contents

>>  
>>                       * Featured content

>>  
>>                       * Current events

>>  
>>                       * Random article

>>  
>>                       * Donate to Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Wikipedia store

>>  
>>

>> ### Interaction

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Help

>>  
>>                       * About Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Community portal

>>  
>>                       * Recent changes

>>  
>>                       * Contact page

>>  
>>

>> ### Tools

>>  
>>                 >>                       * What links here

>>  
>>                       * Related changes

>>  
>>                       * Upload file

>>  
>>                       * Special pages

>>  
>>                       * Permanent link

>>  
>>                       * Page information

>>  
>>                       * Wikidata item

>>  
>>                       * Cite this page

>>  
>>

>> ### Print/export

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Create a book

>>  
>>                       * Download as PDF

>>  
>>                       * Printable version

>>  
>>

>> ### Languages

>>

>> Add links

>>  
>>                 >>                       * This page was last edited on 7
June 2019, at 03:52 (UTC).

>>  
>>                       * Text is available under the Creative Commons
Attribution-

>>  
>>

>> ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you
agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Privacy policy

>>  
>>                       * About Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Disclaimers

>>  
>>                       * Contact Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Developers

>>  
>>                       * Cookie statement

>>  
>>                       * Mobile view

>>  
>>                       * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-
button.png)

>>  
>>                       * ![Powered by

>>  
>>

>> MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

