
>

>> # Pat Robertson controversies

>>

>> From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

>>

>> Jump to navigation Jump to search

>>

>> **Pat Robertson** has made outspoken opinions with respect to religion,
politics and several other subjects. Many of his statements have stirred
controversy and several have been headline news in the United States, and
elsewhere. Many of these comments have been made on his daily talk show, _The
700 Club_.

>>

>> ## Contents

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 1 Criticism of Robertson's faith
healing

>>  
>>                       * 2 Efficacy of Robertson's prayers

>>  
>>                       * 3 Calling non-Christians "termites"

>>  
>>                       * 4 First child conceived out of wedlock

>>  
>>                       * 5 Comments on other Christian denominations

>>  
>>                       * 6 Comments on Islam

>>  
>>                       * 7 Comments on Hinduism

>>  
>>                       * 8 Feminism, homosexuality, abortion and liberalism

>>  
>>                       * 9 Comments on Scotland

>>  
>>                       * 10 Financial ties to politicians

>>  
>>                       * 11 Comments on Chinese abortions

>>  
>>                       * 12 Racehorse ownership

>>  
>>                       * 13 Financial ties to African leaders

>>  
>>                       * 14 Operation Blessing

>>  
>>                       * 15 Comments on the US State Department

>>  
>>                       * 16 Iraq War

>>  
>>                       * 17 Comments on assassinating Hugo Chávez

>>  
>>                       * 18 Attributing statement to Barry W. Lynn

>>  
>>                       * 19 Comments on Dover, Pennsylvania

>>  
>>                       * 20 Comments on Ariel Sharon's health

>>  
>>                       * 21 Comments about "liberal professors"

>>  
>>                       * 22 Leg press claims

>>  
>>                       * 23 Racist comments about Asian appearance

>>  
>>                       * 24 2010 Haiti earthquake

>>  
>>                       * 25 Comments on marijuana laws

>>  
>>                       * 26 Comments advocating divorce

>>  
>>                       * 27 Comments on spousal abuse

>>  
>>                       * 28 Comments on Young Earth creationism

>>  
>>                       * 29 Comments on AIDS

>>  
>>                       * 30 Comments on US-Saudi Arabia relations after the
death of

>>  
>>

>> Jamal Khashoggi

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 31 References

>>  
>>                       * 32 Bibliography

>>  
>>

>> ## Criticism of Robertson's faith healing[edit]

>>

>> In the 1970s and 1980s Robertson was a faith healer. James Randi devoted a
chapter of his book _The Faith Healers_ to criticizing Robertson's faith
healing.[1] Randi commented that "in 1986, soon after the full importance of
the AIDS epidemic began to become evident, Robertson was attempting to cure it
by proclaiming people cured after prayer."[2] Randi also noted, "Gerry Straub,
a former associate of Pat Robertson and his television producer, pointed out
in his book _Salvation for Sale_ the astonishing fact that God seemed to time
miracles to conform with standard television format," and "God would stop
speaking to Pat and stop healing exactly in time with the theme music."[3]
Randi explained that "in 1979, it appeared to Robertson's staff that their
boss had been taking lessons from Oral Roberts" and "proposed to film the
Second Coming!".[4] The project was eventually publicly dropped, but "budget
allocations [CBN] are made for their development."[5]

>>

>> ## Efficacy of Robertson's prayers[edit]

>>

>> Robertson prayed to God to steer hurricanes away from his company's
Virginia Beach, Virginia headquarters. He credited his prayers for steering
the course of Hurricane Gloria in 1985.[6] The storm instead hit the Mid-
Atlantic states and New England, causing $900 million in damage and eight
deaths.

>>

>> ## Calling non-Christians "termites"[edit]

>>

>> In an August 1986 _New York_ magazine article Robertson is quoted saying,
"It is interesting, that termites don't build things, and the great builders
of our nation almost to a man have been Christians, because Christians have
the desire to build something. He is motivated by love of man and God, so he
builds. The people who have come into [our] institutions [today] are primarily
termites. They are into destroying institutions that have been built by
Christians, whether it is universities, governments, our own traditions, that
we have ... The termites are in charge now, and that is not the way it ought
to be, and the time has arrived for a godly fumigation."[7]

>>

>> ## First child conceived out of wedlock[edit]

>>

>> During Robertson's unsuccessful presidential bid in 1987, Robertson told a
Wall Street Journal reporter that his wedding date was actually five months
after the date he had always maintained.[8] Reporters said that the actual
wedding date meant that his first son was conceived out of wedlock and that
Robertson had lied about the date of his marriage in an attempt to cover the
truth up.[8] While conceding the reports were accurate, Robertson said that
begetting his son out of wedlock occurred before Jesus Christ had entered his
life.[8] Robertson denounced the media choosing to report on the issue as
"outrageous" and "reprehensible."[9]

>>

>> ## Comments on other Christian denominations[edit]

>>

>> On January 14, 1991, on _The 700 Club_ , Pat Robertson attacked a number of
Protestant denominations when he declared: "You say you're supposed to be nice
to the Episcopalians and the Presbyterians and the Methodists and this, that,
and the other thing. Nonsense. I don't have to be nice to the spirit of the
Antichrist."[10]

>>

>> ## Comments on Islam[edit]

>>

>> Robertson frequently denounces the religion of Islam and Muslim people.
During a 1995 taping of _The 700 Club_ , he called the religion a "Christian
heresy".[11] During a September 19, 2002 episode of Fox News Channel's
_Hannity & Colmes_ , Robertson claimed that the Muslim prophet Muhammad was
"an absolute wild-eyed fanatic ... a robber and a brigand."[12] On the July
14, 2005 broadcast of _The 700 Club_ , he claimed that "Islam, at its core,
teaches violence."[13]

>>

>> On the March 13, 2006 broadcast of _The 700 Club_ Robertson stated that
Muslims want global domination and that the outpouring of rage elicited by
cartoon drawings of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad "just shows the kind of
people we're dealing with. These people are crazed fanatics, and I want to say
it now: I believe it's motivated by demonic power. It is Satanic and it's time
we recognize what we're dealing with." He finished by stating "by the way,
Islam is not a religion of peace."[14] The Rev. Barry W. Lynn, executive
director of Americans United for Separation of Church and State, slammed
Robertson's comments as "grossly irresponsible". Lynn went on to say, "At a
time when inter-religious tensions around the world are at an all-time high,
Robertson seems determined to throw gasoline on the fire."[15]

>>

>> On the September 25, 2006 broadcast of _The 700 Club_ Robertson stated
"It's amazing how the Muslims deal with history and the truth with violence.
They don't understand what reasoned dialogue is ..."[16]

>>

>> On the November 9, 2009 edition of _The 700 Club_ Robertson stated "Islam
is a violent – I was going to say, 'religion', but it's not a religion; it's a
political system. It's a violent political system bent on the overthrow of the
governments of the world, and world domination. That is the ultimate aim. And
they talk about infidels and all this, but the truth is that's what the game
is. So, you're dealing with a – not a religion – you're dealing with a
political system. And I think we should treat it as such, and treat its
adherents as such, as we would members of the Communist Party, or members of
some fascist group."[17]

>>

>> ## Comments on Hinduism[edit]

>>

>> On March 23, 1995, Pat Robertson led a television program in which he
attacked Hinduism, calling it "demonic". He said that they worship "idols" and
"hundreds of millions of deities," which "has put a nation in bondage to
spiritual forces that have deceived many for thousands of years." He spoke
against the doctrines of karma and reincarnation.[18]

>>

>> These and other remarks have been repudiated by some Hindus. Dr. Kusumita
Pedersen, Director for the Project on Human Rights and Religion, commented
that Robertson has employed "almost every negative image and cliché that has
been used about Hinduism since the 18th century."[19]

>>

>> In his book _The New World Order_ , Robertson wrote: "When I said during my
presidential bid that I would bring only Christians and Jews into the
government, I hit a firestorm. 'What do you mean?' the media challenged me.
'You're not going to bring atheists into the government? How dare you maintain
that those who believe in Christian values are better qualified to govern
America than Hindus and Muslims?' My simple answer is, 'Yes, they are.'"[20]

>>

>> David Cantor, Senior Research Analyst of the Anti-Defamation League, points
out that such "religious tests for office are unconstitutional. It's not just
a purely a religious statement. It's a political statement."[19]

>>

>> ## Feminism, homosexuality, abortion and liberalism[edit]

>>

>> Robertson is opposed to abortion and same-sex marriage.[21][22] He has
described feminism as a "socialist, anti-family political movement that
encourages women to leave their husbands, kill their children, practice
witchcraft, destroy capitalism and become lesbians."[23]

>>

>> Many of Robertson's views mirror those of fellow evangelical activist
pastor Jerry Falwell, who made frequent appearances on _The 700 Club_. He
agreed with Falwell when Falwell stated that the September 11, 2001 terrorist
attacks were caused by "pagans, abortionists, feminists, gays, lesbians, the
American Civil Liberties Union and the People For the American Way."[24][25]

>>

>> The June 8, 1998 edition of his show, where Robertson denounced Orlando,
Florida and Disney World for allowing a privately sponsored "Gay Days"
weekend, also drew criticism from Americans United for Separation of Church
and State. Robertson stated that the acceptance of homosexuality could result
in hurricanes, earthquakes, tornadoes, terrorist bombings and "possibly a
meteor," prompting Americans United to criticize Robertson, saying it was
"deplorable that Robertson is using the tragedy of these fires to promote his
religious and political agenda."[26] The resulting outcry prompted Robertson
to return to the topic on June 24, where he quoted the Book of Revelation to
support his claims. The first hurricane of the 1998 Atlantic hurricane
season,[27] Hurricane Bonnie, actually turned away from Florida and instead
damaged the rest of the East Coast. The area hardest hit by the hurricane was
the Hampton Roads region,[28] which includes Virginia Beach,[29] the place of
origin of Robertson's _The 700 Club_.[30] While other hurricanes did hit
Florida,[27] none of them hit Disney World.[31]

>>

>> While discussing the Mark Foley scandal on the October 5, 2006 broadcast of
the show, Robertson condemned Foley, saying he "does what gay people do" and
claiming that it would not hurt Republican chances in the elections, as "the
church people understand forgiveness, they understand sin."[32]

>>

>> Following the Supreme Court's decision in _Obergefell v. Hodges_ that
legalized same-sex marriage in the United States, Robertson stated, on the
June 29, 2015 episode of _The 700 Club_ , in response to the ruling that,
"You're gonna say that you like anal sex, you like oral sex, you like
bestiality."[33] He went on to say, "Sooner or later, you're going to have to
conform your religious beliefs to the group of some abhorrent thing. It won't
stop at homosexuality."[33]

>>

>> ## Comments on Scotland[edit]

>>

>> In 1999, Bank of Scotland announced a joint venture with Robertson to
establish banks in the United States that conduct all business by telephone, a
business model that had been successful in the United Kingdom.[34] Robertson
said that the Church of Scotland and the Scottish Episcopal Church ignored the
teachings of Saint Paul because they have ordained gays.[34] Robertson also
said that Scotland was "a dark land" overrun by gays.[35] In response the Bank
of Scotland dropped their plans for a business operation with Robertson,
following customer complaints.[35] In a press release, Robertson said that
"media comments about him had made it impossible to proceed."[35]

>>

>> ## Financial ties to politicians[edit]

>>

>> An investigation by the Commonwealth of Virginia's Office of Consumer
Affairs determined that Robertson "willfully induced contributions from the
public through the use of misleading statements and other implications" and
called for a criminal prosecution against Robertson in 1999. However, Virginia
Attorney General Mark Earley, a Republican whose largest campaign contributor
two years earlier was Robertson himself, intervened, accepting that Robertson
had made deceptive appeals but overruling the recommendation for his
prosecution.[36]

>>

>> ## Comments on Chinese abortions[edit]

>>

>> In a 2001 interview with CNN's Wolf Blitzer, he said that the Chinese were
"doing what they have to do," regarding China's one-child policy, sometimes
enforced with compulsory abortions, though he said that he did not personally
agree with the practice.[37] The statement drew criticisms from a variety of
groups, including the Family Research Council, Traditional Values Coalition,
and Concerned Women for America.[38]

>>

>> ## Racehorse ownership[edit]

>>

>> In April 2002, Robertson acknowledged buying a race horse, named "Mr. Pat",
for $520,000. He told a _New York Times_ reporter that his interest in the
horse was based purely on its aesthetics. "I don't bet and I don't gamble. I
just enjoy watching horses running and performing." Christian scholar Martin
Marty criticised this statement by Robertson, stating "The whole culture of
horse racing involves gambling, and all the money comes from people trying to
hit it big gambling. This is like saying you're investing in a bordello but
aren't in favor of prostitution."[39]

>>

>> ## Financial ties to African leaders[edit]

>>

>> Robertson repeatedly supported former President of Liberia, Charles Taylor,
in various episodes of his _The 700 Club_ program during the United States'
involvement in the Second Liberian Civil War in June and July 2003. Robertson
accuses the U.S. State Department of giving President Bush bad advice in
supporting Taylor's ouster as president, and of trying "as hard as they can to
destabilize Liberia."[40]

>>

>> Robertson was criticized for failing to mention in his broadcasts his
$8,000,000 (USD) investment in a Liberian gold mine.[41] Taylor had been
indicted by the United Nations for war crimes at the time of Robertson's
support, and was found guilty of crimes against humanity, including murder,
rape, slavery and the use of child soldiers.[42]

>>

>> Prosecutors also said that Taylor had harbored members of Al Qaeda
responsible for the 1998 U.S. embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania.
According to Robertson, the Liberian gold mine Freedom Gold was intended to
help pay for humanitarian and evangelical efforts in Liberia, when in fact the
company was allowed to fail leaving many debts both in Liberia and in the
international mining service sector.[ _citation needed_ ] Regarding this
controversy, Richard Land, head of the Southern Baptist Convention's public
policy said, "I would say that Pat Robertson is way out on his own, in a
leaking life raft, on this one."[43]

>>

>> ## Operation Blessing[edit]

>>

>> Robertson has also been accused of using his tax-exempt, nonprofit
organization, Operation Blessing International, as a front for his own
financial gain, and then using his influence in the Republican Party to cover
his tracks. After Robertson made emotional pleas in 1994 on _The 700 Club_ for
cash donations to Operation Blessing to support airlifts of refugees from
Rwanda to Zaire, a reporter from _The Virginian-Pilot_ stated that Operation
Blessing's planes were transporting diamond-mining equipment for the
Robertson-owned African Development Corporation, a venture Robertson had
established in cooperation with Zaire's dictator, Mobutu Sese Seko, whom
Robertson had befriended earlier in 1993. According to Operation Blessing
documents, Robertson personally owned the planes used for Operation Blessing
airlifts. A documentary exploring the Operation Blessing controversies,
entitled _Mission Congo_ , premiered at the 2013 Toronto International Film
Festival.[44]

>>

>> Robertson continues to state that Operation Blessing was largely
responsible for providing aid to Rwanda following the 1994 genocide, even
after an official investigation into Operation Blessing described it as a
"fraudulent and deceptive" operation that provided almost no aid. According to
_The Guardian_ , all Operation Blessing volunteers did was recite Bible
passages at dying refugees. Robertson was accused of taking credit for work
that was actually done by Médecins Sans Frontières.[44] On December 12, 2013,
_The Guardian_ issued an apology to Operation Blessing over false claims in
the article "Mission Congo: how Pat Robertson raised millions on the back of a
non-existent aid project" and agreed to make a contribution to Operation
Blessing to be used in its relief efforts for victims of Typhoon Haiyan in the
Philippines.[45] A 1999 report concluded that whilst Robertson's requests for
donations to Operation Blessing had been misleading, they were not an
intentional attempt to commit fraud.[46]

>>

>> ## Comments on the US State Department[edit]

>>

>> On his _The 700 Club_ television program, Pat Robertson has sharply
criticized elements of the United States government and "special interest"
groups that do not share his views. In October 2003 interviews with author
Joel Mowbray about his book "Dangerous Diplomacy", a book critical of the
United States Department of State, Robertson made suggestions that the
explosion of a nuclear weapon at State Department Headquarters would be good
for the country, and repeated those comments on the air. "What we need is for
somebody to place a small nuke at Foggy Bottom."[47]

>>

>> ## Iraq War[edit]

>>

>> Pat Robertson claimed in 2004 that President Bush told him before he led
the United States into the Iraq War, that he expected there to be no
casualties. He made this claim in an interview with CNN, on October 19, 2004.
President Bush's then-press secretary Scott McClellan denied the allegation.
Mike McCurry, press secretary for Democratic Senator John Kerry of
Massachusetts, who was Bush's opponent for the presidency in the 2004
election, said that Bush deserved the benefit of the doubt, but he should say
whether or not Robertson was telling the truth or lying.[48]

>>

>> ## Comments on assassinating Hugo Chávez[edit]

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-

logo.svg/40px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png) | _Wikinews_ has News related to this
article section:  
>  ---|---

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Religious broadcaster Pat
Robertson calls for assassination of

>>  
>>

>> Venezuela's president

>>  
>>                 >>                       * US televangelist Pat Robertson
apologizes for assassination

>>  
>>

>> remark

>>

>> On the August 22, 2005 broadcast of _The 700 Club,_ Robertson said of
Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez:

>>

>>> I don't know about this doctrine of assassination, but if he thinks we're
trying to assassinate him, I think that we really ought to go ahead and do it.
It's a whole lot cheaper than starting a war, and I don't think any oil
shipments will stop.

>>

>> Robertson also said that Chávez was "going to make Venezuela a launching
pad for communist infiltration and Muslim extremism all over the continent"
and called the leader an "out-of-control dictator ... a dangerous enemy to our
south, controlling a huge pool of oil that could hurt us very badly."[49]

>>

>> Assassinations of heads of state have been against U.S. policy since an
executive order against them was issued in 1976; in response, Defense
Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said that "our department doesn't do that kind of
thing." Bernardo Álvarez, Venezuela's ambassador to the U.S., demanded a
stronger condemnation from the White House and that the United States "respect
our country and its president."

>>

>> On the August 24 edition of _The 700 Club,_ Robertson asserted that he
hadn't actually called for Chávez's assassination, but that there were other
ways of "taking him out", such as having special forces carry out a
kidnapping. Robertson explicitly denied having used the word "assassination",
though the word "assassinate" was present in his initial statement.[50] Later
that day, he issued a written statement in which he said, "Is it right to call
for assassination? No, and I apologize for that statement. I spoke in
frustration that we should accommodate the man who thinks the U.S. is out to
kill him". However, he continued to justify his original stance on the
potential threat Chávez posed to U.S. interests,[51] even reiterating his
support for Chavez's assassination on the February 2, 2006 edition of _Hannity
and Colmes_ , replying "[N]ot now, but one day, one day, one day," when asked
whether Robertson wanted Chavez taken out.[52]

>>

>> On Sunday, August 28, 2005, Chávez called on the U.S. Justice Department to
investigate the matter: "My government is going to take legal action in the
United States," he said in a televised speech. "If the U.S. government does
not take the necessary steps, we will denounce the U.S. government at the
United Nations and the Organization of American States".[53]

>>

>> ## Attributing statement to Barry W. Lynn[edit]

>>

>> On the November 5, 2005 airing of _The 700 Club_ , Robertson claimed that
Reverend Barry W. Lynn, director of Americans United for Separation of Church
and State, said that "if a church is burning down, the local community could
not send the fire engine to put the fire out because that would violate,
quote, separation of church and state."[54] Rev. Lynn responded, denying the
allegation and saying "I've seen [Robertson] take pot shots at me with
information I have repeatedly told them is not true. Robertson, for example,
continues to tell national television audiences that I believe that a public
fire department can't go to a burning church without violating the separation
of church and state. He apparently uses this "anecdote" to demonstrate my
radical, wacky beliefs. Trouble is (for him), I never said it and don't
believe it."[55] Robertson also drew criticism from Focus on the Family for
the statement in their magazine, _Citizen_ , saying that "One Christian
conservative leader [presumably Robertson] has mistakenly suggested that Lynn
would say a burning church shouldn't be able to call the fire department lest
it violate the bounds of church-state separation."[56]

>>

>> ## Comments on Dover, Pennsylvania[edit]

>>

>> ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-

logo.svg/40px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png) | Wikinews has related news: _**Religious
broadcaster Pat Robertson warns Pennsylvania town of disaster**_  
>  ---|---

>>

>> On his November 10, 2005 broadcast of _The 700 Club_ , Robertson told
citizens of Dover, Pennsylvania that they had rejected God by voting out of
office all seven members of the school board who support intelligent design.

>>

>> "I'd like to say to the good citizens of Dover: if there is a disaster in
your area, don't turn to God, you just rejected him from your city", Robertson
said on his broadcast.

>>

>> "And don't wonder why he hasn't helped you when problems begin, if they
begin. I'm not saying they will, but if they do, just remember, you just voted
God out of your city. And if that's the case, don't ask for his help because
he might not be there."[57]

>>

>> In a written statement, Robertson later clarified his comments:

>>

>> "God is tolerant and loving, but we can't keep sticking our finger in his
eye forever. If they have future problems in Dover, I recommend they call on
Charles Darwin. Maybe he can help them."[58]

>>

>> ## Comments on Ariel Sharon's health[edit]

>>

>> The lead story on the January 5, 2006, edition of _The 700 Club_ was
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's hospitalization for a severe stroke.
After the story, Robertson said that Sharon's illness was possibly retribution
from God for his recent drive to give more land to the Palestinians. He also
claimed former prime minister Yitzhak Rabin's 1995 assassination may have
occurred for the same reason.[59]

>>

>> The remarks drew criticism from all sides, even from other evangelicals.
For instance, Richard Land, president of the Southern Baptist Convention's
Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission, said that Robertson "ought to know
better" than to say such things. He added, "...the arrogance of the statement
shocks me almost as much as the insensitivity of it."[60] Ted Haggard, then
president of the National Association of Evangelicals, said that "any doctor
could have predicted (Sharon's) going to have health problems" and that his
illness was medical, not divine retribution.[61] The White House called
Robertson's statement "wholly inappropriate and offensive".[62] Robertson was
also chastised by Israeli officials and members of the Anti-Defamation
League.[63]

>>

>> On January 11, Israel responded by announcing that Robertson would be
banned from involvement in a project to build a Christian tourist attraction
and pilgrimage site near the Sea of Galilee known as the Christian Heritage
Center. The plan had called for Israel leasing 35 acres (140,000 m2) of land
to a group of evangelicals (including Robertson) for free to create several
tourist attractions and pilgrimage sites in exchange for the evangelicals
raising 50 million dollars in funding. A spokesman for the Tourism Ministry
commented, "We cannot accept these statements, and we will not sign any
contracts with Mr. Robertson."[64]

>>

>> He added that the decision would not apply to all members of the
evangelical community: "We want to see who in the group supports his
(Robertson's) statements. Those who support the statements cannot do business
with us. Those that publicly support Ariel Sharon's recovery ... are welcome
to do business with us."[65]

>>

>> On January 12, Robertson sent a letter to Sharon's son Omri, apologizing
for his comments. In the letter, Robertson called Ariel Sharon a "kind,
gracious and gentle man" who was "carrying an almost insurmountable burden of
making decisions for his nation." He added that his "concern for the future
safety of your nation led me to make remarks which I can now view in
retrospect as inappropriate and insensitive in light of a national grief
experienced because of your father's illness ... I ask your forgiveness and
the forgiveness of the people of Israel."[66] Omri and the Israeli government
accepted the apology, though it remained unclear whether the deal with
Robertson would be rehabilitated.[67][68][69]

>>

>> While some observers were satisfied by the gesture, some reporters also
accused Robertson of using the apology as a tactic allowing him to make such
statements while promoting a public image among evangelicals as a leader who
does not compromise on his values. Surprisingly, some of the harsher criticism
of Robertson did not come from American or Israeli Jews, but from his fellow
evangelicals and conservative Christians, who charged that Robertson's
behavior did serious harm to evangelicals' image, and led to unfair
generalizations and criticism of them.[70]

>>

>> The fallout from Robertson's comments was still visible over a month after
the event; after speaking with organizers of the National Religious
Broadcasters February 2006 convention, Robertson wound up cancelling his
planned keynote speech.

>>

>> A representative from Israel's Tourism Ministry diplomatically commented,
"Pat Robertson has been a long-term friend of the state of Israel, and
continues to be so."[71]

>>

>> In March 2006, Robertson lost a bid for re-election to the board of
directors of the National Religious Broadcasters.[72]

>>

>> ## Comments about "liberal professors"[edit]

>>

>> On the March 21, 2006 broadcast of _The 700 Club_ , while reviewing _The
Professors: The 101 Most Dangerous Academics in America_ by David Horowitz,
the subject of which is radical academics in American universities, Robertson
went on to say that the 101 professors named in the book are only but a few of
"thirty to forty thousand" left-wing professors in the United States, all of
whom he accused of being "racists, murderers, sexual deviants and supporters
of Al-Qaeda," further labeling them as "termites that have worked into the
woodwork of our academic society." Later in the broadcast, he went on to say,
"these guys are out and out communists, they are radicals, they are, you know,
some of them killers, and they are propagandists of the first order ... you
don't want your child to be brainwashed by these radicals, you just don't want
it to happen. Not only brainwashed but also beat up, they beat these people
up, cower them into submission."[73]

>>

>> ## Leg press claims[edit]

>>

>> In May 2006 Robertson began claiming on his web site that through training
and his "Age-Defying energy shake", he is able to leg press 2,000 lb (907 kg)
while others claim he is a liar, pushing a common energy formula.[74] Two
thousand pounds would be an exceptional accomplishment for a world-class
athlete, to say nothing of Robertson, then in his seventies. For comparative
purposes, when Dan Kendra set the Florida State University record of 1,335 lb
(606 kg), the leg press machine required extensive modifications to hold the
proper amount of weight, and the capillaries in both of Kendra's eyes burst
during his successful attempt.[75] Thus, Robertson's claimed achievement would
add 665 lb (302 kg) to the best-ever total of Kendra, a top athlete in his
physical prime, who later played in the National Football League and tried
unsuccessfully to become a Navy SEAL.[76][77]

>>

>> In response to the skepticism about this claim, Robertson's website has
claimed that his doctor is able to leg press 2,700 lb (1,225 kg), and that "It
is not nearly as hard as the authors of these reports make it out to be."[78]
A video has also been provided supposedly demonstrating Robertson doing
several reps with a weight of 1,000 lb (454 kg).[79] In the video Pat
Robertson is seen using a 45-degree sled-type leg press machine, which reduces
the effective weight to 707 lb (321 kg) ( _sin_ (45°) x 1000 lbs [454 kg]). He
keeps the safety locks in place at the second step, which severely limits the
range of possible motion. The seat is positioned to allow approximately six
inches of travel after the lock. This setup gives Pat Robertson the maximum
mechanical advantage at the last few inches of travel. In contrast, actual leg
press technique is allowing the weight to slide down until the hip and knee
joints are at significant flexion.[80] The video of Roberson's lift has also
been criticized because it does not appear to verify his claim that he's
lifting 1,000 lb (454 kg). Mike DeBonis of _Slate_ noted "It appears as if 16
plates are loaded on the machine. Four of them look like 100-pound [45 kg]
plates, and the rest are 45s [20 kg]. That adds up to 940 pounds [425 kg]."
DeBonis also noted that Robertson is using incorrect form as he "helps his
legs by pushing on his knees with his arms. That's a no-no. He also achieves
nowhere near the recommended full range of motion, which is to bring the knees
to at least a 90-degree angle." DeBonis saw the claims made by Robertson and
similar claims by Madeleine Albright (that she can press 400 lb (181 kg)) as
yet another proof of the inferiority of that particular machine in comparison
to the barbell squat, "Most leg press machines are constructed as either a
sled angled at 45 degrees or a lever. (There are some that use cables, too.)
In all cases, some of the weight gets borne by the machine. You may be loading
400 pounds [180 kg], but your muscles are feeling only 200 [90 kg]."[81] The
video has since been removed from the CBN website.

>>

>> Robertson responded to questions concerning the lift in an interview with
CBS. He maintained his claim to have done it but admitted "I didn't do it with
the same form that these professional bodybuilders do, which is a full squat,
and it's very difficult. But I did do it. I regularly can do 1,000 pounds [454
kg] and 1,200 pounds [544 kg]."[82] He said he used an incline leg press and
did "the full extension on that particular machine. They have a brake on it. I
was told put the brake on. When the professionals do it, they take the brake
off and let the weight come all the way down on them. And if you don't have a
lot of help, you've got a Volkswagen sitting on your hips. I didn't do
that."[82]

>>

>> In June 2006, General Nutrition Center, a nutritional supplement retailer,
announced without explanation that it would stop carrying Robertson's energy
drink.[83]

>>

>> ## Racist comments about Asian appearance[edit]

>>

>> On the February 7, 2007 edition of _The 700 Club_ , Robertson stated that
people who have too much plastic surgery "got the eyes like they're Oriental"
and stretched his eyelids in a manner stereotypical of Asians.[84]

>>

>> ## 2010 Haiti earthquake[edit]

>>

>> On the January 13, 2010 broadcast of _The 700 Club_ , Robertson blamed the
Haitians for making a deal with the Devil during their 1791 slave rebellion,
resulting in the Haiti earthquake of January 12, 2010 and other misfortunes.
He told viewers of his Christian Broadcasting Network:

>>

>>> ... something happened a long time ago in Haiti, and people might not want
to talk about it, they were under the heel of the French, uh, you know,
Napoleon the third and whatever, and they got together and swore a pact to the
devil, they said, we will serve you, if you get us free from the French, true
story. And so the devil said, 'OK, it's a deal.' And they kicked the French
out, the Haitians revolted and got themselves free, and ever since they have
been cursed by one thing after the other, desperately poor.[85][86]

>>

>> He went on to state:

>>

>>> That island of Hispaniola is one island. It is cut down the middle; on the
one side is Haiti on the other is the Dominican Republic. Dominican Republic
is prosperous, healthy, full of resorts, etc. Haiti is in desperate poverty.
Same island. They need to have and we need to pray for them a great turning to
God and out of this tragedy I'm optimistic something good may come. But right
now we are helping the suffering people and the suffering is unimaginable.[87]

>>

>> The reference to a "pact to the devil" was later said by CBN to be a
reference to the Vodou ceremony conducted by Dutty Boukman involving animal
sacrifice in Bois Caïman that began the Haitian revolution. Contrary to
Robertson's claims however, this ceremony and the religion of Vodou in general
does not involve Satan or devil worship.[88] Robertson mistakenly identified
the French government as that of Napoleon III, as Haiti became independent
(and the Revolution won) four years before Napoleon III was born.[89] In fact,
it was Napoleon Bonaparte (by far, the more famous of the two rulers), who
sent a French army to try to recapture Haiti a decade after its revolution.
The force was destroyed by yellow fever and the fierce resistance led by
Haitian generals.

>>

>> Veteran Christian radio broadcaster Michael Ireland stated that this
Haitian Vodou ceremony has long been erroneously referenced by various self-
assoiling Christian sources as the "pact with the devil" or "pact to the
devil" that began the Haitian revolution.[90] This Vodou ceremony was a
ceremonial impulsion to the liberation of thousands of abjectly enslaved
peoples under French, mostly Christian, tyranny: and as such has been
perverted over the following decades to besmear a righteous liberty-struggle
as formed of wicked means.[90] These Christians were influenced by spiritual
warfare theology and concerned that the Aristide government had made efforts
to incorporate the Vodou sector more fully into the political process. These
Evangelicals developed a counter-narrative to the official national story. In
this narrative, the ancestral spirits at the Vodou cemetery were re-cast as
demons. In their view, the engagement with demons amounted to a pact that put
Haiti under the rule of Satan. While some Haitian Evangelicals subscribe to
this idea, most Haitian nationalists vehemently oppose it.[91] According to
Gothenburg University researcher Markel Thylefors, "The event of the Bois
Caïman ceremony forms an important part of Haitian national identity as it
relates to the very genesis of Haiti."[88]

>>

>> In his daily press briefing on January 14, 2010, White House Press
Secretary Robert Gibbs said of Robertson's commentary: "It never ceases to
amaze that in times of amazing human suffering somebody says something that
could be so utterly stupid."[89]

>>

>> Mainline and evangelical Christian voices appeared mostly unanimous in
criticizing Robertson's remarks as untrue, untimely and insensitive.[92]

>>

>> ## Comments on marijuana laws[edit]

>>

>> On the December 16, 2010 broadcast of _The 700 Club_ Pat Robertson
condemned harsh sentences for people convicted of possession of cannabis.
Robertson stated, "We're locking up people that take a couple of puffs of
marijuana, and the next thing you know they've got 10 years." He went on to
say, "I'm not exactly for the use of drugs – don't get me wrong – but I just
believe that criminalizing marijuana, criminalizing the possession of a few
ounces of pot and that kind of thing, I mean, it's just costing us a fortune
and it's ruining young people."[93]

>>

>> Robertson's remarks were applauded by the National Organization for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws and the Drug Policy Alliance. Executive Director of
the Drug Policy Alliance Ethan Nadelmann said, "The people who are listening
to him may roll their eyes when the Democrats say this, but when Pat Robertson
says this he has credibility in the faith community."[94]

>>

>> Appearing on _Good Morning America_ , Vice President Joe Biden condemned
Robertson's commentary, saying, "I still believe it's a gateway drug. I've
spent a lot of my life as chairman of the Judiciary Committee dealing with
this. I think it would be a mistake to legalize."[95]

>>

>> ## Comments advocating divorce[edit]

>>

>> On the September 14, 2011, broadcast of _The 700 Club_ , a viewer talked
about a friend who was bitter at God because his wife had Alzheimer's disease,
and the friend had started seeing another woman.[96] The viewer asked
Robertson for his advice.[96] Robertson responded, "I know it sounds cruel,
but if he's going to do something, he should divorce her and start all over
again, but make sure she has custodial care and somebody looking after
her."[97] He continued saying, "If you respect that vow, you say 'til death do
us part. This is a kind of death."[97]

>>

>> In response, Russell D. Moore, Dean of the School of Theology at the
Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, wrote that Robertson's comments were "a
repudiation of the gospel of Jesus Christ" and that "Pat Robertson's cruel
marriage statement is no anomaly. He and his cohorts have given us for years a
prosperity gospel with more in common with an Asherah pole than a cross."[98]

>>

>> Following a backlash over Robertson's advice, Robertson said, "Basically
I'm saying, adultery is not a good thing and you might as well straighten your
life out and the only way to do it is to kind of get your affair with your
wife in order. ... I was not giving advice to the whole world and nor was I
counseling anybody to be unscriptural and leave their spouse. ... Please know
that I believe the Bible. Please know that I never would tell anybody to leave
their sick spouse. I never never would say such a thing because I need my
spouse when I get sick and she needs me when she gets sick. In sickness and in
health, I believe it!"[96]

>>

>> ## Comments on spousal abuse[edit]

>>

>> Robertson was criticized in September 2012 after a man named Michael called
_The 700 Club_ asking for advice on what to do about his wife not respecting
him. Robertson called the woman a "rebellious child" who did not want to
"submit to any authority." He jokingly suggested that Michael become a Muslim
and move to Saudi Arabia where he could beat her. Critics noted that
Robertson's comments about wife-beating were edited out of the episode when it
appeared on the Christian Broadcasting Network.[99]

>>

>> ## Comments on Young Earth creationism[edit]

>>

>> In November 2012, a viewer of _The 700 Club_ wrote that one of her biggest
fears was that her children and husband would not go to heaven "because they
question why the Bible could not explain the existence of dinosaurs."

>>

>> Before answering the question, Robertson acknowledged the statement was
controversial by saying, "I know that people will probably try to lynch me
when I say this." He then replied: "You go back in time, you've got
radiocarbon dating. You got all these things, and you've got the carcasses of
dinosaurs frozen in time out in the Dakotas. They're out there. So, there was
a time when these giant reptiles were on the Earth, and it was before the time
of the Bible. So, don't try and cover it up and make like everything was 6,000
years. That's not the Bible. If you fight science, you're going to lose your
children, and I believe in telling them the way it was."[100]

>>

>> Young Earth creationist and director of Answers in Genesis, Ken Ham
responded to Robertson's commentary by saying: "Not only do we have to work
hard to not let our kids be led astray by the anti-God teaching of the
secularists, we have to work hard to not let them be led astray by
compromising church leaders like Pat Robertson. Pat Robertson gives more
fodder to our enemies."[101] Ham said, referring to secularists and atheists
who applauded Robertson online for his statements.[102] He went on to say
that, "Such leaders — including Pat Robertson — have a lot to answer to the
Lord for one day, such leaders are guilty of putting stumbling blocks in the
way of kids and adults in regards to believing God's word and the
Gospel."[101]

>>

>> In May 2014, Robertson responded to a caller regarding the age of the
earth: "You have to be deaf, dumb and blind to think that this Earth that we
live in only has 6,000 years of existence, it just doesn't, I'm sorry ... To
deny the clear record that's there before us makes us looks silly ... There's
no way that all this that you have here took place in 6,000 years, it just
couldn't have been done, couldn't possibly have been done."[103]

>>

>> Once again, Ham vociferously criticized Robertson's remarks saying: "Pat
Robertson illustrates one of the biggest problems we have today in the church-
people like Robertson compromise the Word of God with the pagan ideas of
fallible men!" Ham went on to say: "Pat Robertson is not upholding the Word of
God with his ridiculous statements -- he is undermining the authority of the
Word."[104]

>>

>> ## Comments on AIDS[edit]

>>

>> On the August 27, 2013 episode of _The 700 Club_ , Robertson said that
members of the San Francisco gay community would deliberately infect people
with AIDS by cutting them with a sharp, infected ring while shaking hands. The
comment was edited out when the clip was posted online, but as of September 5,
2013 the video was available from other outlets.[105] He also said that the
homosexual community had put laws on the books prohibiting people from
mentioning their HIV status.[106]

>>

>> During the October 16, 2014 episode of _The 700 Club_ , a viewer sent in an
email saying she had been called by God to go on a mission trip to Kenya but
friends and family had expressed fears that she could catch Ebola in Kenya. In
his answer, Robertson pointed out that there was not currently an outbreak of
Ebola in Kenya, but warned of the risk of AIDS, stating: "You might get AIDS
in Kenya, people have AIDS, you've got to be careful. I mean, the towels could
have AIDS." Health experts subsequently stated that towels cannot have
AIDS.[107] The comment angered viewers in Kenya who took to Twitter to express
their disapproval using the hashtag _someonetellPatRobertson_.[108] The show
later apologized.

>>

>> ## Comments on US-Saudi Arabia relations after the death of Jamal

>>

>> Khashoggi[edit]

>>

>> Robertson received criticism after stating that "we've got an arms deal
that everybody wanted a piece of ... it'll be a lot of jobs, a lot of money
come to our coffers. It's not something you want to blow up willy-nilly" in
the wake of the murder of Jamal Khashoggi.[109]

>>

>> ## References[edit]

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. **^** Randi 1989, pp. 197–206.

>>  
>>                       2. **^** Randi 1989, pp. 199–200.

>>  
>>                       3. **^** Randi 1989, p. 200.

>>  
>>                       4. **^** Randi 1989, p. 204.

>>  
>>                       5. **^** Randi 1989, p. 205.

>>  
>>                       6. **^** "Pat Robertson Says Storm Put Him on Path to
'88 Bid:

>>  
>>

>> Prayer Diverted Hurricane, Robertson Asserted on TV". _TheLos Angeles
Times_. Associated Press. September 17, 1986. Archived from the original on
August 2, 2013. Retrieved April 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       7. **^** _New York_ (magazine), p.
24, August 18, 1986 Missing or

>>  
>>

>> empty `|title=` (help).

>>  
>>                 >>                       8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
Taylor, Paul (October 9, 1987).

>>  
>>

>> "Robertson Assails 'Outrageous' Reports: Media Criticized for Examining
Inconsistencies of Life, Career". _The Washington Post_. p. A1.

>>  
>>                 >>                       9. **^** Eichel, Larry (October 9,
1987). "Robertson Assails

>>  
>>

>> Press, Admits Backdated Wedding". _Philly_. Archived from the original on
March 3, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       10. **^** Palast, Greg (May 23,
1999), "'I don't have to be nice

>>  
>>

>> to the spirit of the Antichrist': Right-wing TV evangelist and former
Presidential candidate Pat Robertson is the man Bank of Scotland has chosen to
spearhead its US subsidiary. Why?", _TheGuardian Unlimited_ , UK.

>>  
>>                 >>                       11. **^** Sabri, BJ (January 28,
2005), "Part 26: Dick Cheney,

>>  
>>

>> numbers and the metaphysics of 9/11", _Online Journal_ , archived from the
original on 2007-09-30.

>>  
>>                 >>                       12. **^** "Hannity & Colmes",
_News Channel_ , Fox, September 19,

>>  
>>

>> 2002.

>>  
>>                 >>                       13. **^** _The 700 Club_ , July
14, 2005.

>>  
>>                       14. **^** Barisic, Sonja (March 14, 2006), "Robertson
says Islam

>>  
>>

>> isn't a faith of peace: Televangelist calls radicals 'demonic'", _Boston_ ,
Associated Press, archived from the original on October 12, 2007, retrieved
September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       15. **^** Americans United for
Separation of Church and State:

>>  
>>

>> Americans United Deplores Tv Preacher Pat Robertson's Inflammatory Attack
On Islam Archived 2013-10-24 at the Wayback Machine. March 13, 2006.

>>  
>>                 >>                       16. **^** _The 700 Club_ ,
September 25, 2006.

>>  
>>                       17. **^** "Robertson on Islam: "It's not a religion
... it's a

>>  
>>

>> violent political system "", _The Washington Post_ , November 10, 2009,
archived from the original on February 2, 2013, retrieved February 9, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       18. **^** Rajan, Valli J. (July
1995). "Christian Pat Robertson

>>  
>>

>> Denounces Hinduism as "Demonic"". _Hinduism Today_. Sullivan county.
Archived from the original on 2007-10-05. Retrieved 2007-09-18.

>>  
>>                 >>                       19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Using TV,
Christian Pat Robertson Denounces

>>  
>>

>> Hinduism as "Demonic "", _Hinduism Today_ , July 1995, archived from the
original on 2010-01-17, retrieved 2010-07-26.

>>  
>>                 >>                       20. **^** Robertson, Pat, _The New
World Order_ , p. 218 Missing

>>  
>>

>> or empty `|title=` (help).

>>  
>>                 >>                       21. **^** "Abortion to Die by
1,000 Cuts After Today's Supreme

>>  
>>

>> Court Ruling". Christian Coalition. 2007-01-18. Retrieved 2007-03-31.[
_dead link_ ]

>>  
>>                 >>                       22. **^** "California Governor
Arnold Schwarzenegger Keeps Promise

>>  
>>

>> and Will Veto Abominable Homosexual "Marriage" Bill Passed By Legislature
Which Ignored Overwhelming Vote of California Voters in Proposition 22 Banning
Homosexual "Marriage "". Christian Coalition. 2005-09-09. Archived from the
original on 2007-02-03. Retrieved 2007-03-31.

>>  
>>                 >>                       23. **^** "Equal Rights Initiative
in Iowa Attacked", _The

>>  
>>

>> Washington Post_ , August 23, 1992.

>>  
>>                 >>                       24. **^** Harris, John F
(September 14, 2001), "God Gave US 'What

>>  
>>

>> We Deserve,' Falwell Says", _The Washington Post_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       25. **^** Niebuhr, Gustav
(September 14, 2001), "US 'Secular'

>>  
>>

>> Groups Set Tone for Terror Attacks, Falwell Says", _The New York Times_ ,
archived from the original on March 4, 2016, retrieved February 19, 2017.

>>  
>>                 >>                       26. **^** _TV Preacher Pat
Robertson Expands On 'Gay Days'

>>  
>>

>> Comments_, Americans United for Separation of Church and State, June 23,
1998, archived from the original on October 24, 2013 , retrieved February 9,
2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       27. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _Hurricane
season_ (report), National

>>  
>>

>> Hurricane Center, 1998, archived from the original on 2004-06-10 ,
retrieved 2009-03-27.

>>  
>>                 >>                       28. **^** _Hurricane Bonnie_
(report), National Hurricane Center,

>>  
>>

>> 1998, archived from the original on 2008-09-17 , retrieved 2009-03-27.

>>  
>>                 >>                       29. **^** "Virginia Beach",
_Virginia Is For Lovers_, archived

>>  
>>

>> from the original on 2006-05-08 , retrieved 2009-03-27.

>>  
>>                 >>                       30. **^** _700 Club_, CBN,
2013-06-13, archived from the original

>>  
>>

>> on 2009-03-04 , retrieved 2009-03-27.

>>  
>>                 >>                       31. **^** _Disney World's Local
Weather_, Mickey Mouse, archived

>>  
>>

>> from the original on 1999-10-13 , retrieved 2009-03-27.

>>  
>>                 >>                       32. **^** _The 700 Club_ , October
5, 2006.

>>  
>>                       33. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Pat Robertson says gays will
make

>>  
>>

>> Christians like anal sex and bestiality". Archived from the original on
2015-07-12. Retrieved 2015-07-10.

>>  
>>                 >>                       34. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Reid, T. R.
(May 23, 1999). "The Heavenly

>>  
>>

>> Deal That Went South: Bank of Scotland's Partnership With TV Evangelist
Ignites a Furor". _The Washington Post_. p. H1.

>>  
>>                 >>                       35. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_
"Bank drops evangelist". _News_. UK:

>>  
>>

>> BBC. June 5, 1999. Archived from the original on December 15, 2013.
Retrieved April 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       36. **^** "Pat Robertson's Katrina
Cash", _The Nation_ ,

>>  
>>

>> 2005-09-07, archived from the original on 2010-07-25, retrieved 2010-07-26.

>>  
>>                 >>                       37. **^** Blitzer, Wolf (April 16,
2001), _Reports_ (transcript),

>>  
>>

>> CNN, archived from the original on March 22, 2014 , retrieved February 9,
2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       38. **^** "Did Pat Robertson Just
Defend China's One-Child

>>  
>>

>> Policy?", _Christianity Today_ , April 1, 2001, archived from the original
on February 14, 2013, retrieved February 9, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       39. **^** Finley, William 'Bill'
(April 22, 2002). "Horse Racing:

>>  
>>

>> A Moralist Who Loves Racing". _The New York Times_. Archived from the
original on October 21, 2009. Retrieved May 21, 2010.

>>  
>>                 >>                       40. **^** Cooperman, Alan (July
10, 2003), "Robertson Defends

>>  
>>

>> Liberia's President", _The Washington Post_ , archived from the original on
August 15, 2018, retrieved September 7, 2017.

>>  
>>                 >>                       41. **^** King, Colbert I
(September 22, 2001), "Pat Robertson's

>>  
>>

>> Gold", _The Washington Post_.

>>  
>>                 >>                       42. **^** Goodman, David (May 30,
2012). "Ex-Liberian Leader Gets

>>  
>>

>> 50 Years for War Crimes". _The New York Times_. Archived from the original
on July 10, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       43. **^** Vegh, Steven G (January
13, 2006), "Pat Robertson, a

>>  
>>

>> prophet to his believers", _The Virginian-Pilot_ , archived from the
original on May 19, 2006.

>>  
>>                 >>                       44. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ McGreal,
Chris (September 6, 2013). "Mission

>>  
>>

>> Congo: how Pat Robertson raised millions on the back of a non-existent aid
project". _The Guardian_. UK. Archived from the original on September 5, 2013.
Retrieved September 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       45. **^** Editor, Clarifications
Column (December 12, 2013).

>>  
>>

>> "Corrections and clarifications". _The Guardian_. Archived from the
original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved February 11, 2014.

>>  
>>                 >>                       46. **^** "Guardian Newspaper
Apologizes". The Christian Post.

>>  
>>

>> Archived from the original on 2014-02-14. Retrieved 2014-02-11.

>>  
>>                 >>                       47. **^** Labott, Elise (10
October 2003). "Pat Robertson's 'nuke'

>>  
>>

>> idea draws protest". _CNN_. Archived from the original on 10 December 2011.
Retrieved 28 October 2011.

>>  
>>                 >>                       48. **^** "No casualties? White
House disputes Robertson comment".

>>  
>>

>> _CNN_. October 21, 2004. Archived from the original on July 12, 2009.
Retrieved May 21, 2010.

>>  
>>                 >>                       49. **^** _Evangelist Robertson
Says U.S. Should Kill Chavez_,

>>  
>>

>> Bloomberg, August 23, 2005, archived from the original on November 14, 2012
, retrieved March 10, 2017.

>>  
>>                 >>                       50. **^** _The 700 Club, August
24, 2005._

>>  
>>                       51. **^** _Pat Robertson Clarifies His Statement
Regarding Hugo

>>  
>>

>> Chávez_ (press release), Christian Broadcasting Network, August 24, 2005,
archived from the original on December 3, 2008 , retrieved September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       52. **^** "Hannity & Colmes",
_News Channel_ , Fox, February 2,

>>  
>>

>> 2006.

>>  
>>                 >>                       53. **^** "Venezuela seeks action
in US row", _News_ , BBC, August

>>  
>>

>> 29, 2005, archived from the original on February 8, 2008, retrieved
September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       54. **^** _The 700 Club_ ,
November 5, 2005.

>>  
>>                       55. **^** Lynn, Barry (November 2002), _Memo To Pat
and Jerry:

>>  
>>

>> Thou Shalt Not Bear False Witness_, Americans United for Separation of
Church and State, archived from the original on 2015-07-07 , retrieved
2013-02-09.

>>  
>>                 >>                       56. **^** _Focus on the Family's
Citizen_ (article), 2000.

>>  
>>                       57. **^** Kauffman, Christina (November 16, 2005),
"Robertson:

>>  
>>

>> 'Don't turn to God': New Dover board angry at televangelist's comments",
_The York Dispatch_ , archived from the original on 2007-09-27.

>>  
>>                 >>                       58. **^** "Evangelist says voters
reject God", _News_ , BBC,

>>  
>>

>> November 11, 2005, archived from the original on August 22, 2006, retrieved
September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       59. **^** _Robertson suggests God
smote Sharon: Evangelist links

>>  
>>

>> Israeli leader's stroke to 'dividing God's land'_, CNN, January 6, 2006,
archived from the original on April 28, 2006.

>>  
>>                 >>                       60. **^** Berger, Knute (January
11, 2006), "In Defense of Pat

>>  
>>

>> Robertson: Why is it so wrong to speculate that God smote Sharon?", _The
Seattle Weekly_ , archived from the original on December 29, 2006.

>>  
>>                 >>                       61. **^** _What They Are Saying:
Evangelicals Speak Out On Pat

>>  
>>

>> Robertson_, The Anti-Defamation League, January 9, 2006, archived from the
original on September 13, 2007 , retrieved September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       62. **^** Webb, Justin (January 6,
2006), "US attacks TV host on

>>  
>>

>> Sharon slur", _News_ , BBC, archived from the original on February 27,
2008, retrieved September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       63. **^** _ADL Outraged at Pat
Robertson's Remarks Blaming

>>  
>>

>> Sharon's Stroke on the Wrath of God_, Anti-Defamation League, January 5,
2006, archived from the original on 2007-10-12 , retrieved 2007-09-18.

>>  
>>                 >>                       64. **^** Myre, Greg (January 12,
2006), _Israelis' Anger at

>>  
>>

>> Evangelist May Delay Christian Center_, The New York Times [ _permanent
dead link_ ].

>>  
>>                 >>                       65. **^** Krawitz, Avi (January
11, 2006), "Israel rejects Pat

>>  
>>

>> Robertson funding", _The Jerusalem Post_ [ _permanent dead link_ ].

>>  
>>                 >>                       66. **^** Wignall, Mark (January
15, 2006), "Pat Robertson and

>>  
>>

>> religious violence", _The Jamaica Observer_ , archived from the original on
September 15, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       67. **^** Murphy, Brian (January
13, 2006), "Robertson apologizes

>>  
>>

>> for saying stroke was a divine punishment", _The Associated Press_ ,
archived from the original on October 12, 2007, retrieved September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       68. **^** Rosner, Shmuel (January
15, 2006), _Educating Robertson:

>>  
>>

>> Who won the battle?_, Ha'aretz, archived from the original on October 1,
2007 , retrieved September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       69. **^** Vegh, Steven G (January
19, 2006), "Israelis may let

>>  
>>

>> Robertson back into Galilee plan", _The Virginian-Pilot_ [ _permanent dead
link_ ].

>>  
>>                 >>                       70. **^** Barisic, Sonja (February
18, 2006), "Pat Robertson

>>  
>>

>> accused of damaging movement", _Mercury news_ , Associated Press, archived
from the original on March 2, 2006, retrieved September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       71. **^** "Pat Robertson absent
from religious broadcasters'

>>  
>>

>> convention", _New 8_ , Austin: Associated Press, February 20, 2006,
archived from the original on October 12, 2007, retrieved September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       72. **^** "Robertson Loses
Broadcasters' Board Seat", _SF gate_ ,

>>  
>>

>> Associated Press, March 2, 2006, archived from the original on March 9,
2008, retrieved April 23, 2019.

>>  
>>                 >>                       73. **^** _The 700 Club_ , March
21, 2006.

>>  
>>                       74. **^** _Pat Robertson's Age-Defying Shake_, CBN,
archived from

>>  
>>

>> the original on May 23, 2006 , retrieved May 22, 2006.

>>  
>>                 >>                       75. **^** Travis, Clay (April 28,
2006). "Madeleine Albright is

>>  
>>

>> stronger than me". CBS. Archived from the original on October 19, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       76. **^** Travis, Clay (May 22,
2006). "Pat Robertson's magical

>>  
>>

>> protein shake". CBS. Archived from the original on August 19, 2006.
Retrieved May 25, 2006.

>>  
>>                 >>                       77. **^** Fiore, Faye (Feb 12,
2006), "A Wholly Controversial Holy

>>  
>>

>> Man", _The Los Angeles Times_ , "Robertson projects a youthful vitality and
a larger-than-life image — clasping hands on-air with a co-host to pray for a
miraculous healing."

>>  
>>                 >>                       78. **^** _How Pat Robertson Leg
Pressed 2,000 Pounds_, CBN,

>>  
>>

>> 2013-10-17, archived from the original on 2008-05-16 , retrieved
2007-09-18.

>>  
>>                 >>                       79. **^** _iFilm_, archived from
the original on 2006-12-17 ,

>>  
>>

>> retrieved 2007-09-18

>>  
>>                 >>                       80. **^** "Leg press", _Weight
exercises_, EXRX, archived from the

>>  
>>

>> original on 2008-01-31 , retrieved 2008-02-01: technique discussed and
illustrated — includes animation of correct leg press being performed.

>>  
>>                 >>                       81. **^** DeBonis, Michael 'Mike'
(May 27, 2006). "The Lamest

>>  
>>

>> Exercise in the World". Slate. Archived from the original on September 30,
2007. Retrieved September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       82. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Robertson
Answers Weighty Criticisms". CBS.

>>  
>>

>> June 7, 2006. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved
September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       83. **^** _GNC drops Pat
Robertson's muscle drink_, United Press

>>  
>>

>> International, June 5, 2006, archived from the original on October 12, 2007
, retrieved September 18, 2007.

>>  
>>                 >>                       84. **^** Slansky, Paul (2008),
_Idiots, Hypocrites, Demagogues,

>>  
>>

>> and More Idiots: Not-So-Great Moments in Modern American Politics_ ,
Bloomsbury, p. 101.

>>  
>>                 >>                       85. **^** "Robertson: Haiti had
"pact with devil "", _Salon_ ,

>>  
>>

>> 2010-01-13, archived from the original on 2011-06-04.

>>  
>>                 >>                       86. **^** "US evangelist says
quake-hit Haiti made 'devil' pact",

>>  
>>

>> _France 24_ , 2010-01-13, archived from the original on 2010-01-16.

>>  
>>                 >>                       87. **^** Shea, Danny
(2010-01-13), "Pat Robertson: Haiti "Cursed"

>>  
>>

>> By "Pact To The Devil"", _The Huffington post_ , archived from the original
on 2010-01-15, retrieved 2010-01-14.

>>  
>>                 >>                       88. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Thylefors,
Markel (March 2009), "'Our

>>  
>>

>> Government is in Bwa Kayiman:' a Vodou Ceremony in 1791 and its
Contemporary Signifcations" (PDF), _Stockholm Review of Latin American
Studies_ (4), archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-07-22.

>>  
>>                 >>                       89. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Condon,
Stephanie (January 14, 2010). "Pat

>>  
>>

>> Robertson Haiti Comments Spark Uproar". _News_. CBS. Archived from the
original on January 16, 2010. Retrieved January 15, 2010.

>>  
>>                 >>                       90. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Ireland,
Michael (January 17, 2010). "Urban

>>  
>>

>> Legend Expert Debunks Haitian 'Pact with the Devil'". _Assist news_.
Archived from the original on January 21, 2010. Retrieved September 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       91. **^** Elizabeth McAlister
(2012). "From Slave Revolt to a

>>  
>>

>> Blood Pact with Satan: The Evangelical Rewriting of Haitian History".
_Studies in Religion/Sciences Religieuses_. **41** (2). Archived from the
original on 2014-07-14. Retrieved 2014-06-08.

>>  
>>                 >>                       92. **^** Poling, Jason (January
14, 2010). "Jason Poling: A

>>  
>>

>> message for Pat Robertson". _Sun_. Baltimore. Archived from the original on
May 31, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       93. **^** "Pat Robertson Stirs the
Pot Over Marijuana Laws". _Fox

>>  
>>

>> News_. December 24, 2010. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012.
Retrieved April 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       94. **^** Szkotaks, Steve
(December 23, 2010). "Religious

>>  
>>

>> broadcaster questions harsh pot laws". _guardian.co.uk_. Archived from the
original on February 4, 2014. Retrieved April 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       95. **^** McCarthy, Kate (December
23, 2010). "Biden on Pat

>>  
>>

>> Robertson's Push to Legalize Pot: It's 'A Mistake'". _ABC News_. Archived
from the original on February 2, 2014. Retrieved April 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       96. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Pat
Robertson on divorcing

>>  
>>

>> Alzheimer's spouses: I'm misunderstood". _Christianity Today Australia_.
September 28, 2011. Archived from the original on November 3, 2011. Retrieved
October 21, 2011.

>>  
>>                 >>                       97. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Breen, Tom
(September 15, 2011). "Pat

>>  
>>

>> Robertson says Alzheimer's makes divorce OK". ABC News. Associated Press.
Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved April 23, 2019.

>>  
>>                 >>                       98. **^** Moore, Russell (15
September 2011). "Pat Robertson

>>  
>>

>> Repudiates the Gospel". _Christianity Today_. Archived from the original on
23 September 2011.

>>  
>>                 >>                       99. **^** "Pat Robertson,
Televangelist, Encourages Man To Become

>>  
>>

>> Muslim So He Can Beat His Wife". _The Huffington Post_. September 11, 2012.
Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved April 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       100. **^** "Pat Robertson
challenges creationism". Archived from

>>  
>>

>> the original on 2013-11-03. Retrieved 2013-10-31.

>>  
>>                 >>                       101. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Ken Ham of
Creation Museum Slams Robertson

>>  
>>

>> for Dismissing Young Earth Theory". Archived from the original on
2013-10-14. Retrieved 2013-10-31.

>>  
>>                 >>                       102. **^** "Atheists Aren't the
Only Problem!". Archived from the

>>  
>>

>> original on 2013-10-14. Retrieved 2013-10-31.

>>  
>>                 >>                       103. **^** "Pat Robertson Says
'You Have to be Deaf, Dumb and

>>  
>>

>> Blind' to Believe in Young Earth Creationism". Archived from the original
on 2016-04-25. Retrieved 2016-04-12.

>>  
>>                 >>                       104. **^** "Ken Ham Fires Back at
Pat Robertson Who Dismisses

>>  
>>

>> Young Earth Creationists as 'Deaf, Dumb and Blind '". Archived from the
original on 2016-04-25. Retrieved 2016-04-12.

>>  
>>                 >>                       105. **^** Tashman, Brian (August
27, 2013). "Robertson: Gay

>>  
>>

>> People Deliberately Spread HIV/AIDS By Cutting People With Special Rings".
_Right wing watch_. Archived from the original on August 30, 2013. Retrieved
September 5, 2013.

>>  
>>                 >>                       106. **^** Sieczkowski, Cavan
(2013-08-27), "Pat Robertson

>>  
>>

>> Suggests Gays With AIDS Wear Rings To Cut, Infect Others", _The Huffington
post_ , archived from the original on 2013-08-28, retrieved 2013-08-29.

>>  
>>                 >>                       107. **^** Edwards, David (16
October 2014). "'The towels could

>>  
>>

>> have AIDS': Pat Robertson issues scientifically false Kenya warning". _The
Raw Story_. Archived from the original on 20 October 2014. Retrieved 21
October 2014.

>>  
>>                 >>                       108. **^** "Kenyans criticise US
preacher's Aids slur". _Africa

>>  
>>

>> Review_. 20 October 2014. Archived from the original on 21 September 2016.
Retrieved 21 October 2014.

>>  
>>                 >>                       109. **^** "Pat Robertson Cares
More About a Saudi Weapons Deal

>>  
>>

>> Than a Journalist's Murder". 2018-10-18. Archived from the original on
2018-10-19. Retrieved 2018-10-19.

>>

>> ## Bibliography[edit]

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Randi, James (1989), _The Faith
Healers_, Prometheus Books, ISBN

>>  
>>

>> 978-0-87975-535-5

>>

>> ![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

>>

>> Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pat_Robertson_controversies&oldid=897001652"

>>

>> Categories:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Controversies by person

>>  
>>                       * Intelligent design controversies

>>  
>>                       * Political controversies in the United States

>>  
>>                       * Protestantism-related controversies

>>  
>>                       * Television controversies in the United States

>>  
>>

>> Hidden categories:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Pages with citations lacking
titles

>>  
>>                       * Webarchive template wayback links

>>  
>>                       * All articles with dead external links

>>  
>>                       * Articles with dead external links from September
2016

>>  
>>                       * Articles with dead external links from January 2017

>>  
>>                       * Articles with permanently dead external links

>>  
>>                       * All articles with unsourced statements

>>  
>>                       * Articles with unsourced statements from February
2012

>>  
>>

>> ## Navigation menu

>>

>> ### Personal tools

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Not logged in

>>  
>>                       * Talk

>>  
>>                       * Contributions

>>  
>>                       * Create account

>>  
>>                       * Log in

>>  
>>

>> ### Namespaces

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Article

>>  
>>                       * Talk

>>  
>>

>> ### Variants

>>

>> ### Views

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Read

>>  
>>                       * Edit

>>  
>>                       * View history

>>  
>>

>> ### More

>>

>> ### Search

>>

>> ### Navigation

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Main page

>>  
>>                       * Contents

>>  
>>                       * Featured content

>>  
>>                       * Current events

>>  
>>                       * Random article

>>  
>>                       * Donate to Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Wikipedia store

>>  
>>

>> ### Interaction

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Help

>>  
>>                       * About Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Community portal

>>  
>>                       * Recent changes

>>  
>>                       * Contact page

>>  
>>

>> ### Tools

>>  
>>                 >>                       * What links here

>>  
>>                       * Related changes

>>  
>>                       * Upload file

>>  
>>                       * Special pages

>>  
>>                       * Permanent link

>>  
>>                       * Page information

>>  
>>                       * Wikidata item

>>  
>>                       * Cite this page

>>  
>>

>> ### Print/export

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Create a book

>>  
>>                       * Download as PDF

>>  
>>                       * Printable version

>>  
>>

>> ### Languages

>>

>> Add links

>>  
>>                 >>                       * This page was last edited on 14
May 2019, at 04:38 (UTC).

>>  
>>                       * Text is available under the Creative Commons
Attribution-

>>  
>>

>> ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you
agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Privacy policy

>>  
>>                       * About Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Disclaimers

>>  
>>                       * Contact Wikipedia

>>  
>>                       * Developers

>>  
>>                       * Cookie statement

>>  
>>                       * Mobile view

>>  
>>                       * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-
button.png)

>>  
>>                       * ![Powered by

>>  
>>

>> MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

