
>

>> Do something for our planet, print this page only if needed. Even a small
action can make an enormous difference when millions of people do it!

>>

>> Toggle navigation

>>

>> Skip to content. | Skip to navigation

>>

>> ![European Environment Agency](https://www.eea.europa.eu/EEA-

logo-25-anniversary.svg)

>>

>> | |

>>

>> ---|---|---

>>

>> Advanced search A-Z Glossary

>>

>> ##### Sections

>>  
>>                 >>                       * European Environment Agency

>>  
>>                       * Topics

>>  
>>                       * Countries

>>  
>>                       * Data and maps

>>  
>>                       * Indicators

>>  
>>                       * Publications

>>  
>>                       * Media

>>  
>>                       * About us

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * EN

>>  
>>                       * Log in to CMS

>>  
>>                       * Search

>>  
>>                       * The EEA is an agency of the European Union

>>  
>>                       *             * Albanian (sq)

>>  
>>                         * Български (bg)

>>  
>>                         * Bosnian (bs)

>>  
>>                         * čeština (cs)

>>  
>>                         * Hrvatski (hr)

>>  
>>                         * dansk (da)

>>  
>>                         * Nederlands (nl)

>>  
>>                         * ελληνικά (el)

>>  
>>                         * English (en)

>>  
>>                         * eesti (et)

>>  
>>                         * Suomi (fi)

>>  
>>                         * Français (fr)

>>  
>>                         * Deutsch (de)

>>  
>>                         * magyar (hu)

>>  
>>                         * Íslenska (is)

>>  
>>                         * italiano (it)

>>  
>>                         * Latviešu (lv)

>>  
>>                         * lietuvių (lt)

>>  
>>                         * Macedonian (mk)

>>  
>>                         * Malti (mt)

>>  
>>                         * Norsk (no)

>>  
>>                         * polski (pl)

>>  
>>                         * Português (pt)

>>  
>>                         * Română (ro)

>>  
>>                         * slovenčina (sk)

>>  
>>                         * Slovenščina (sl)

>>  
>>                         * Español (es)

>>  
>>                         * Svenska (sv)

>>  
>>                         * Türkçe (tr)

>>  
>>

>> | |

>>

>> ---|---|---

>>

>> Advanced search A-Z Glossary

>>

>> Error

>>  
>>                 >>                 Cookies are not enabled. You must enable
cookies before you can log in.

>>  
>>

>> The EEA Web CMS works best with following browsers:

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Google Chrome (recommended)

>>  
>>                         * Firefox

>>  
>>

>> Internet Explorer is not recommended for the CMS area.

>>

>> Login Name

>>

>> Password

>>

>> **Forgot your password?**

>>

>> If you have forgotten your password, we can send you a new one.

>>

>> Personal tools

>>

>> You are here:

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. __

>>  
>>                       2. Data and maps

>>  
>>                       3. Indicators

>>  
>>                       4. Greenhouse gas emission trends

>>  
>>                       5. Greenhouse gas emission trends

>>  
>>

>> Info

>>

>> # Greenhouse gas emission trends

>>  
>>                 >>                       * PDF

>>  
>>

>> This website has limited functionality with javascript off. Please make
sure javascript is enabled in your browser.

>>

>> Indicator Assessment

>>

>> **Prod-ID:** IND-37-en

>>

>> **Also known as:** CSI 010 , CLIM 050

>>

>> expired Created 16 Nov 2007 Published 21 Feb 2008 Last modified 25 Aug 2017

>>

>> 27 min read

>>

>> **This is an old version** , kept for reference only.

>>

>> Go to latest version

>>

>> Topics: Climate change mitigation ,

>>

>> This page was **archived** on 25 Aug 2017 with reason: A new version has
been published

>>

>> Total greenhouse gas emissions in the EU-27, excluding emission and
removals from land-use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF), decreased by
0.7 % between 2004 and 2005 and by 7.9 % between 1990 and 2005. Emissions
decreased strongly in the new Member States during the 1990s but since 2000,
the trends have been almost identical in the EU-15 and in the new Member
States. Between 1990 and 2005, greenhouse gas emissions decreased in all
sectors except in the transport sector, where they increased significantly. In
the EU-15, total greenhouse gas emissions (excluding LULUCF) decreased by 0.8
% between 2004 and 2005, by 1.5 % between 1990 and 2005 and by 2.0 % between
the Kyoto base year and 2005. This means the EU-15 has achieved one fourth of
the total reduction needed to achieve the 8 % reduction from base-year level
required by 2008-2012 under the Kyoto Protocol. However, the target can also
be reached through actions outside the EU (use of Kyoto mechanisms). In the 12
new Member States, total greenhouse gas emissions (excluding LULUCF) decreased
by 0.3 % between 2004 and 2005 and by 27.8 % between 1990 and 2005. Except in
Slovenia, 2005 emissions of all the new Member States that have a Kyoto target
were well below their Kyoto target.

>>

>> ### Key messages

>>

>> Total greenhouse gas emissions in the EU-27, excluding emission and
removals from land-use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF), decreased by
0.7 % between 2004 and 2005 and by 7.9 % between 1990 and 2005. Emissions
decreased strongly in the new Member States during the 1990s but since 2000,
the trends have been almost identical in the EU-15 and in the new Member
States. Between 1990 and 2005, greenhouse gas emissions decreased in all
sectors except in the transport sector, where they increased significantly.

>>

>> In the EU-15, total greenhouse gas emissions (excluding LULUCF) decreased
by 0.8 % between 2004 and 2005, by 1.5 % between 1990 and 2005 and by 2.0 %
between the Kyoto base year and 2005. This means the EU-15 has achieved one
fourth of the total reduction needed to achieve the 8 % reduction from base-
year level required by 2008-2012 under the Kyoto Protocol. However, the target
can also be reached through actions outside the EU (use of Kyoto mechanisms).

>>

>> In the 12 new Member States, total greenhouse gas emissions (excluding
LULUCF) decreased by 0.3 % between 2004 and 2005 and by 27.8 % between 1990
and 2005. Except in Slovenia, 2005 emissions of all the new Member States that
have a Kyoto target were well below their Kyoto target.

>>

>> ## What progress has been made in reducing greenhouse gas emissions in

>>

>> Europe?

>>

>> Greenhouse gas emissions in the EU-27, the EU-15 and in new Member States,
1990-2005, index 100 = base year level (EU-15) or 1990 levels (EU-27, new
Member States)

>>

>> ![Greenhouse gas emissions in the EU-27, the EU-15 and in new Member
States,

1990-2005, index 100 = base year level \(EU-15\) or 1990 levels \(EU-27, new

Member States\)](https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/greenhouse-

gas-emissions-in-the-eu-27-the-eu-15-and-in-new-member-

states-1990-2005-index-100-base-year-level-eu-15-or-1990-levels-eu-27-new-

member-states/image_xlarge)

>>

>> **Note:** N/A

>>

>> **Data source:**

>>

>> EEA, based on EU-15 Member States greenhouse gas inventories 1990-2005.

>>

>> Downloads and more info

>>

>> Greenhouse gas emissions in the EU-27, the EU-15 and in new Member States,
1990-2005

>>

>> ![Greenhouse gas emissions in the EU-27, the EU-15 and in new Member
States,

1990-2005](https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/greenhouse-gas-

emissions-in-the-eu-27-the-eu-15-and-in-new-member-

states-1990-2005/image_xlarge)

>>

>> **Note:** Index 100 = 2000 levels

>>

>> **Data source:**

>>

>> EEA, based on EU Member States greenhouse gas inventories 1990-2005.

>>

>> Downloads and more info

>>

>> Change in greenhouse gas emissions in Europe between the base years and
2005, compared to Kyoto targets for 2008-2012

>>

>> ![Change in greenhouse gas emissions in Europe between the base years and

2005, compared to Kyoto targets for 2008-2012](https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-

and-maps/figures/change-in-greenhouse-gas-emissions-in-europe-between-the-

base-years-and-2005-compared-to-kyoto-targets-for-2008-2012/image_xlarge)

>>

>> **Note:** The EU-27, Cyprus and Malta have no target under the Kyoto
Protocol, and therefore no legal base year

>>

>> **Data source:**

>>

>> EEA, based on EU Member States greenhouse gas inventories 1990-2005.

>>

>> Downloads and more info

>>

>> #### 2005 greenhouse gas emissions

>>

>> In 2005, total greenhouse gas emissions, excluding emission and removals
from land-use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) were:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 5 177 million tonnes
CO2-equivalent (Mt CO2-eq.) in the EU-27;

>>  
>>                       * 4 192 Mt CO2-eq. in the pre-2004 EU Member States
(EU-15);

>>  
>>                       * 985 Mt CO2-eq. in the 12 new Member States.

>>  
>>

>> In 2005, the EU-15 accounted for 81 % of total EU-27 greenhouse gas
emissions. The largest emitters of greenhouse gas emissions in the EU-27 were
Germany (19 %), the United Kingdom (13 %), Italy (11 %), France (11 %) and
Spain (9 %).

>>

>> #### 2004-2005 trends

>>

>> Between 2004 and 2005, total greenhouse gas emissions, excluding LULUCF:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * decreased by by 0.7 % (38 Mt
CO2-eq.) in the EU-27;

>>  
>>                       * decreased by 0.8 % (35 Mt CO2-eq.) in the EU-15;

>>  
>>                       * decreased by 0.3 % (3 Mt CO2-eq.) in the new Member
States.

>>  
>>

>> In absolute terms, emissions were reduced most in Germany (-23 Mt CO2-eq.)
and Finland (-12 Mt CO2-eq.). In Germany, a shift from coal to gas in the
production of public electricity and heat was one of the main reasons for the
decrease in emissions. In addition, emissions from road transportation and
from households and services declined substantially. In Finland, emission
reductions were mainly due to a substantial decrease in the use of fossil
fuels in the production of public electricity and heat, mainly due to
electricity imports. Coal use, in particular, decreased.

>>

>> Emissions increased most in Spain (+15 Mt CO2-eq.). This increase came
mainly from public electricity and heat production and was due to a rise in
electricity generation from fossil thermal power stations (17 %) and a
decrease in electricity generation from hydropower plants (-33 %). Other EU-15
countries which saw emissions increase between 2004 and 2005 are: Austria,
Greece, Ireland, Italy and Portugal.

>>

>> In relative terms, the largest decreases were observed in Finland (-15 %)
and Denmark (-6 %), while emissions in Lithuania and Malta increased by 7 %
and 6 %, respectively. Emissions from Turkey increased by 6.5 % (+19 Mt
CO2-eq.)

>>

>> #### 1990-2005 trends

>>

>> Between 1990 and 2005 (Figure 1), total greenhouse gas emissions, excluding
LULUCF:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * decreased by 7.9 % (444 Mt
CO2-eq.) in the EU-27;

>>  
>>                       * decreased by 1.5 % (65 Mt CO2-eq.) in the EU-15;

>>  
>>                       * decreased by 27.8 % (379 Mt CO2-eq.) in the new
Member States.

>>  
>>

>> The 1990-2005 trends in total EU-27 greenhouse gas emissions were dominated
by developments in Germany (-226 Mt CO2-eq. ), the United Kingdom (-114 Mt
CO2-eq.) and Spain (+153 Mt CO2-eq.). Significant changes were also observed
in Romania (-95 Mt CO2-eq.), Poland (-87 Mt CO2-eq.) and Italy (+63 Mt
CO2-eq.).

>>

>> In relative terms, emissions decreased strongly in the new Member States
between 1990 and 2000, mainly due to the introduction of market economies and
the consequent restructuring or closure of heavily polluting and energy-
intensive industries. However since 2000, the trends have been almost
identical in the EU-15 and in the new Member States (Figure 2). Between 1990
and 2005, emissions decreased most in Latvia (-59 %), Lithuania (-53 %) and
Estonia (-53 %), while emissions increased most in Malta (+55 %), Spain (+53
%) and Portugal (+43 %).

>>

>> In the other EEA member countries, the most significant trend was the +84 %
increase in emissions from Turkey (+150 Mt CO2-eq.).

>>

>> #### Comparison with Kyoto targets ( _Figure 3_ )

>>

>> In the EU-15, total greenhouse gas emissions, excluding LULUCF, decreased
by 2.0 % (87 Mt CO2-eq.) between the Kyoto base year and 2005. Therefore in
2005, EU-15 greenhouse gas emissions stood well above the -8 % Kyoto target.
The emissions of four EU-15 Member States (Sweden, the United Kingdom, Finland
and France) were lower than their respective burden-sharing targets, while
emissions from Greece were close to to target. Significant reductions need
still to be made especially in Spain, Austria and Luxembourg, either by
reducing domestic emissions or by making use of Kyoto mechanisms (see also CSI
011 and EEA report on Greenhouse gas emissions trends and projections in
Europe).

>>

>> Of the 12 new Member States, Cyprus and Malta do not have a Kyoto target.
The emissions of the other new Member States, except Slovenia, were well below
their Kyoto target in 2005. The situation was similar in the EU acceding
country Croatia.

>>

>> 2005 emissions of the other EEA member countries stood above these
countries' respective Kyoto targets. Reductions will be needed either by
domestic measures or by making use of Kyoto mechanisms.

>>

>> Data related to emission trends since 1990 and progress towards Kyoto
targets can be viewed at country level on the EEA greenhouse gas data viewer.

>>

>> ## What are the emission changes by sector and by greenhouse gas?

>>

>> Shares by sector in EU-15 greenhouse gas emissions in 2005

>>

>> ![Shares by sector in EU-15 greenhouse gas emissions in

2005](https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/shares-by-sector-in-

eu-15-greenhouse-gas-emissions-in-2005/image_xlarge)

>>

>> **Note:** Emissions from the energy supply and use sector include emissions
from energy supply industries, fugitive emissions, emissions from energy use
in industry and other emissions from energy use

>>

>> **Data source:**

>>

>> EEA, based on EU-15 Member States greenhouse gas inventories.

>>

>> Downloads and more info

>>

>> Changes in EU-27 greenhouse gas emissions by sector, 1990-2005

>>

>> ![Changes in EU-27 greenhouse gas emissions by sector,

1990-2005](https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/changes-in-

eu-27-greenhouse-gas-emissions-by-sector-1990-2005/image_xlarge)

>>

>> **Note:** International marine and aviation not included in the categories
Total emissions, Energy and Transport.

>>

>> **Data source:**

>>

>> EEA, based on EU Member States greenhouse gas inventories.

>>

>> Downloads and more info

>>

>> Changes in EU-15 greenhouse gas emissions by sector, 1990-2005

>>

>> ![Changes in EU-15 greenhouse gas emissions by sector,

1990-2005](https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/changes-in-

eu-15-greenhouse-gas-emissions-by-sector-1990-2005/image_xlarge)

>>

>> **Note:** International marine and aviation not included in the categories;
Total emissions, Energy and Transport.

>>

>> **Data source:**

>>

>> EEA, based on EU Member States greenhouse gas inventories.

>>

>> Downloads and more info

>>

>> Changes in greenhouse gas emissions from new Member States by sector,
1990-2005

>>

>> ![Changes in greenhouse gas emissions from new Member States by sector,

1990-2005](https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/changes-in-

greenhouse-gas-emissions-from-new-member-states-by-

sector-1990-2005/image_xlarge)

>>

>> **Note:** International marine and aviation not included in the categories
Total emissions, Energy and Transport.

>>

>> **Data source:**

>>

>> EEA, based on EU Member States greenhouse gas inventories.

>>

>> Downloads and more info

>>

>> Greenhouse gas emissions can be viewed by country, year, gas and sector on
the EEA greenhouse gas data viewer.

>>

>> Greenhouse gas emissions due to energy supply and use including transport
represent 80 % of all greenhouse gas emissions in the EU-27, as well as in the
EU-15 (Figure 4). Between 1990 and 2005, EU-27 greenhouse gas emissions
decreased in all sectors except in the transport sector, where they increased
significantly (Figure 5).

>>

>> #### 2004-2005 trends in the EU-15

>>

>> In absolute terms, the main sectors contributing to emissions reductions
between 2004 and 2005 in the EU-15 were public electricity and heat
production, households and services, and road transport.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CO2 emissions from public
electricity and heat production

>>  
>>

>> decreased by 0.9% (-9.6 million tonnes) mainly due to a reduction in the
reliance on coal.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CO2 emissions from households
and services decreased by 1.7 %

>>  
>>

>> (7.0 million tonnes). Important decreases in emissions from household and
services were reported by Germany, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands. One
general reason for the decrease is the warmer weather conditions (milder
winter) compared to the previous year.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CO2 emissions from road
transport decreased by 0.8% (6 million

>>  
>>

>> tonnes). This is mainly attributed to Germany, and is due to increased
amounts of diesel oil driven cars, the effects of the eco-tax and fuel buying
from outside Germany (fuel tourism).

>>

>> #### 1990-2005 trends in the EU-15

>>

>> Between 1990 and 2005, greenhouse gas emissions in the EU-15 decreased in
all sectors except in the transport sector, where they increased significantly
(+26 %) (Figure 6). CO2 emissions from international aviation and navigation
(which are not included here) increased by 96 % and 50 %, respectively. The
largest relative decreases was observed in emissions from the waste sector.
Most of the emissions reductions occured in the 1990s, largely a result of:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * increasing efficiency in power
and heating plants,

>>  
>>                       * the economic restructuring in eastern Germany,

>>  
>>                       * the liberalisation of the energy market and
subsequent changes

>>  
>>

>> in the choice of fuel used in electricity production from oil and coal to
gas in the United Kingdom,

>>  
>>                 >>                       * significant reductions in
nitrous oxide emissions in the

>>  
>>

>> chemical industry in France, Germany and the United Kingdom.

>>

>> After 1999, emissions rose again until 2004, due to increasing energy and
transport demand. More solid and gaseous fuels were used for the production of
public electricity and heat (whereas liquid fuels were used less). Higher
transport volumes (freight and passengers) led to higher emissions from road
transport, which is responsible for more than 90 % of domestic transport
emissions. The use of diesel oil increased by 22 % while the use of gasoline
decreased by 13 %.

>>

>> _Energy supply and use (excluding transport)_

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Greenhouse gas emissions
decreased by 3 %, due to a significant

>>  
>>

>> decrease of CO2 emissions from manufacturing industries and construction.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CO2 emissions from manufacturing
industries and construction

>>  
>>

>> decreased by 10 %, mainly due to efficiency improvements and structural
changes in Germany after reunification. After an increase observed between
2003 and 2004, these emissions remained stable in 2005.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CO2 emissions from public
electricity and heat production

>>  
>>

>> increased by +6 %, driven by increasing electricity production in thermal
power plants (+38 %). However, in 2005, these emissions were decreasing for
the second consecutive year (-0.9 % compared to 2004).

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CH4 emissions from fugitive
emissions decreased by 53 %, mainly

>>  
>>

>> due to the decline of coal mining.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CO2 emissions from households
decreased by 1.7 %, while the

>>  
>>

>> number of dwellings increased by 18 %.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Decoupling of greenhouse gas
emissions from energy consumption

>>  
>>

>> has been observed in all Member States, although there are large
differences between Member States.

>>

>> _Transport_

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Greenhouse gas emissions
(domestic transport) increased by 26%,

>>  
>>

>> mainly due to CO2 emissions from road transport (which represent more than
90 % of domestic transport emissions). However, for the first time since 1990,
CO2 emissions from road transport decreased by 0.8 % (6.0 million tonnes)
between 2004 and 2005. This is mainly attributed to Germany, and is due to an
increased share of diesel-powered cars, increasing fuel prices (including
effects of the eco-tax) and purchase of fuel outside Germany.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CO2 emissions from international
aviation grew by 96 % and CO2

>>  
>>

>> emissions from international navigation (maritime transport) grew by 50 %.
These emissions grew faster than in all other transport modes.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * N2O emissions increased by more
than 100 %. The reason is mainly

>>  
>>

>> that catalytic converters, which reduce cars' exhaust emissions of certain
air pollutants but produce N2O as a by-product, have become standard
equipment. This strong growth is expected to stop soon as the whole fleet will
soon be equipped with catalytic converters.

>>

>> _Industrial processes_

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Greenhouse gas emissions (CO2,
N2O and fluorinated gases) were

>>  
>>

>> reduced by 11 %.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CO2 emissions from cement
production increased by 5 %.

>>  
>>                       * N2O emissions from chemical industries decreased by
54 %, mainly

>>  
>>

>> due to specific measures at adipic acid production plants in the United
Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands and France.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Large increases mainly as the
result of expanding use of HFCs

>>  
>>

>> (as a substitute for ozone depleting CFCs that were gradually phased out in
the 1990s) were offset by decreases of emissions from the production of
halocarbons and SF6.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * HFC emissions from refrigeration
and air conditioning increased

>>  
>>

>> by a factor of more than 400.

>>

>> _Agriculture and waste_

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Greenhouse gas emissions fell by
11 %. In particular, N2O

>>  
>>

>> emissions from agricultural soils fell by 13 %, due to a decline in
fertiliser and manure use.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Greenhouse gas emissions from
waste fell by 38 %, mainly due to

>>  
>>

>> the development of landfill gas recovery.

>>

>> #### 1990-2005 trends in the new Member States

>>

>> Between 1990 and 2005, greenhouse gas emissions in the new Member States
have been reduced in all the main sectors responsible for greenhouse gas
emissions except for transport, where emissions increased by 30 % (Figure 7).

>>

>> Transport emissions decreased by 6 % between 1990 and 1995, but increased
after 1995. The new Member States seem to be repeating the experience of
Ireland, Portugal and Spain: starting from a relatively low transport level,
all these countries experienced high economic growth which resulted in strong
growth in transport and related greenhouse gas emissions.

>>

>> ## Indicator specification and metadata

>>

>> ### Indicator definition

>>

>> This indicator presents anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in Europe
from 1990 onwards. It analyses the trends (total and by sector) in relation to
the European Community and Member States Kyoto targets for the period
2008-2012.

>>

>> #### Definitions (from UNFCCC)

>>

>> **Emissions** : the release of greenhouse gases and/or their precursors
into the atmosphere over a specified area and period of time.

>>

>> **Greenhouse gases** : those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both
natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and re-emit infrared radiation.

>>

>> **Sink** : any process, activity or mechanism which removes a greenhouse
gas, an aerosol or a precursor of a greenhouse gas from the atmosphere.

>>

>> **Source** : any process or activity which releases a greenhouse gas, an
aerosol or a precursor of a greenhouse gas into the atmosphere.

>>

>> Emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases are
calculated according to the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories (see Methodology), as agreed upon by the Conference
of the Parties to the UNFCCC.

>>

>> #### Scope

>>

>> **Gases**

>>

>> All the greenhouse gases covered by the Kyoto Protocol (CO2, CH4, N2O, SF6,
HFCs and PFCs). This does not include the greenhouse gases that are also
ozone-depleting substances and which are controlled by the Montreal Protocol
(see CSI 006).

>>

>> In order to be aggregated, non-CO2 gases are weighed by their respective
global warming potential and presented in CO2-equivalent units.

>>

>> **Emission sources**

>>

>> The indicator provides information on emissions from the main anthropogenic
greenhouse gas sources, distributed by main emitting sectors (according IPCC
nomenclature):  
>

>>  
>>                 >>                       * energy supply and use (including
energy industry, fugitive

>>  
>>

>> emissions, energy use by industry and by other sectors, excluding the
transport sector);  
>

>>  
>>                 >>                       * transport;

>>  
>>                       * industry (processes, i.e. not including emissions
from fossil

>>  
>>

>> fuel combustion for energy use);

>>  
>>                 >>                       * agriculture;

>>  
>>                       * waste;

>>  
>>                       * other (non-energy).

>>  
>>

>> Unless otherwise mentioned, the indicator does not cover emissions from
international bunkers (international aviation and maritime transport), which
are not covered by the Kyoto Protocol. In particular, these emissions are not
taken into account in the total greenhouse gas emissions reported at national
and EU levels.

>>

>> Emissions from land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) are not
included in total greenhouse gas emissions.  
>

>>

>> **Geographical area**

>>

>> The indicator covers all 27 Member States from the European Union. Some
figures also include information concerning other EEA Member States.  
>

>>

>> **Period covered  
>  **

>>

>> The indicator covers annual emissions since 1990.

>>

>> ### Units

>>

>> Greenhouse gas emissions are expressed in 'million tonnes CO2-equivalent'
(Mt CO2-eq.)  
>

>>

>> ### Rationale

>>

>> #### Justification for indicator selection

>>

>> Climate change is one of our greatest environmental, social and economic
threats. The warming of the climate system is unequivocal, says the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Observations show increases
in global average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and
ice, and rising global mean sea level. It is very likely that most of the
warming can be attributed to the emissions of greenhouse gases by human
activities.

>>

>> Over the past 150 years, mean temperature has increased by almost 0.8 °C
globally and by about 1 °C in Europe. Without global action to limit
emissions, the IPCC expects that global temperatures may increase further by
1.8 to 4.0 °C by 2100. This means that temperature increase since pre-
industrial times would exceed 2 °C. Beyond this threshold irreversible and
possibly catastrophic changes become far more likely.

>>

>> To halt climate change, global greenhouse gas emissions must be reduced
significantly, and policies to do so must be put in place and fully
implemented.

>>

>> The main sources of man-made greenhouse gases are:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * burning of fossil fuels in
electricity generation, transport,

>>  
>>

>> industry and households;

>>  
>>                 >>                       * agriculture and land use changes
like deforestation;

>>  
>>                       * land filling of waste;

>>  
>>                       * use of industrial fluorinated gases.

>>  
>>

>> The present indicator CSI 010 presents total and sectoral trends of
greenhouse gas emissions in the European Union and other EEA member countries,
and can be used to assess progress in reducing emissions in the EU and the
individual Member States (see Policy context section).

>>

>> #### Scientific references

>>  
>>                 >>                       * No rationale references
available

>>  
>>

>> ### Policy context and targets

>>

>> #### Context description

>>

>> The present indicator CSI 010 aims to support the European Commission's
annual assessment of progress in reducing emissions in the EU and the
individual Member States to achieve the Kyoto Protocol targets under the EU
Greenhouse Gas Monitoring Mechanism (Council Decision 280/2004/EC concerning a
mechanism for monitoring Community GHG emissions and for implementing the
Kyoto Protocol).

>>

>> **Background  
>  **

>>

>> The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) sets an
ultimate objective of stabilizing greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations 'at a
level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic (human induced) interference
with the climate system.' It also requires precise and regularly updated
inventories of greenhouse gas emissions from industrialized countries. With a
few exceptions, the 'base year' for tabulating greenhouse gas emissions has
been set as 1990.

>>

>> The Kyoto Protocol is an international agreement linked to the UNFCCC which
sets binding targets for industrialized countries and the European community
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. These amount to an average of five per
cent against 1990 levels over the five-year period 2008-2012. (See next
section).  
>

>>

>> The European Community (EC), as a party to the UNFCCC, reports annually on
the greenhouse gas emissions within the area covered by its Member States. The
Annual European Community greenhouse gas inventory and inventory report,
officially submitted to the UNFCCC Secretariat, is prepared on behalf of the
European Commission (DG Environment) by the European Environment Agency's
European Topic Centre for Air and Climate Change (ETC/ACC) supported by the
Joint Research Centre and Eurostat.

>>

>> The legal basis of the compilation of the EC inventory is Council Decision
No 280/2004/EC concerning a mechanism for monitoring Community greenhouse gas
emissions and for implementing the Kyoto Protocol. The purpose of this
decision is to:

>>  
>>                 >>                       1. monitor all anthropogenic GHG
emissions covered by the Kyoto

>>  
>>

>> Protocol in the Member States;

>>  
>>                 >>                       2. evaluate progress towards
meeting GHG reduction commitments

>>  
>>

>> under the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol;

>>  
>>                 >>                       3. implement the UNFCCC and the
Kyoto Protocol as regards national

>>  
>>

>> programmes, greenhouse gas inventories, national systems and registries of
the Community and its Member States, and the relevant procedures under the
Kyoto Protocol;

>>  
>>                 >>                       4. ensure the timeliness,
completeness, accuracy, consistency,

>>  
>>

>> comparability and transparency of reporting by the Community and its Member
States to the UNFCCC Secretariat.

>>

>> #### Targets

>>

>> Under the Kyoto Protocol, the EU-15 has taken on a common commitment to
reducing emissions by 8 % on average between 2008 and 2012, compared to base-
year emissions.

>>

>> Within this overall target, differentiated emission limitation or reduction
targets have been agreed for each of the 15 pre-2004 Member States under an EU
accord known as the 'burden-sharing agreement'. These targets are set out in
the Annex II to the Council Decision 2002/358/EC concerning the approval, on
behalf of the European Community, of the Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC and the
joint fulfilment of commitments thereunder.

>>

>> The EU-12 Member States (apart from Cyprus and Malta) have individual
targets under the Kyoto Protocol. Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania, Romania, Slovak Republic and Slovenia have reduction targets of 8 %
from the base year, while Hungary and Poland have reduction targets of 6 %.

>>

>> Of the additional EEA member countries, Norway and Iceland are allowed to
increase emissions under the Kyoto Protocol by 1 % and 10 %, respectively,
from their base-year emissions. Switzerland and Liechtenstein have reduction
targets of 8 %. Turkey is a Party to the UNFCCC, but not to the Kyoto Protocol
and therefore has no reduction target. Croatia, an EU candidate country which
started accession negotiations with the EU in 2005, ratified the Kyoto
Protocol in May 2007 and has a reduction target of 5 %.

>>

>> **Base year**  
>

>>

>> Under the Kyoto Protocol, the greenhouse gas emission level in the base
year is the relevant starting point for tracking progress. For most EU Member
States, the base year is 1990 for carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and
nitrous oxide (N2O), and 1995 for fluorinated gases (SF6, HFCs and PFCs). Five
of the new Member States have base years or periods under the Convention and
the Kyoto Protocol that differ from 1990 for CO2, CH4 and N2O, which is
possible for economies in transition.

>>

>> **National Kyoto or burden-sharing targets (reduction from base-year
levels)**

>>

>> Country

>>

>> | Kyoto Target 2008-2012  
>  ---|---

>>

>> Austria

>>

>> |

>>

>> -13%

>>

>> Belgium

>>

>> |

>>

>> -7.5%

>>

>> Bulgaria [1]

>>

>> |

>>

>> -8.0%

>>

>> Croatia

>>

>> |

>>

>> -5.0%

>>

>> Czech Republic

>>

>> |

>>

>> -8.0%

>>

>> Cyprus

>>

>> |

>>

>>           * Denmark [2]

>>

>> |

>>

>> -21.0%

>>

>> Estonia

>>

>> |

>>

>> -8.0%

>>

>> Finland

>>

>> |

>>

>> 0%

>>

>> France

>>

>> |

>>

>> 0%

>>

>> Germany

>>

>> |

>>

>> -21.0%

>>

>> Greece

>>

>> |

>>

>> +25.0%

>>

>> Hungary [3]

>>

>> |

>>

>> -6.0%

>>

>> Iceland

>>

>> |

>>

>> -10.0%

>>

>> Ireland

>>

>> |

>>

>> +13.0%

>>

>> Italy

>>

>> |

>>

>> -6.5%

>>

>> Latvia

>>

>> |

>>

>> -8.0%

>>

>> Liechtenstein

>>

>> |

>>

>> -8.0%

>>

>> Lithuania

>>

>> |

>>

>> -8.0%

>>

>> Luxembourg

>>

>> |

>>

>> -28.0%

>>

>> Malta

>>

>> |

>>

>>           * Netherlands

>>

>> |

>>

>> -6.0%

>>

>> Norway

>>

>> |

>>

>> 1.0%

>>

>> Poland [4]

>>

>> |

>>

>> -6.0%

>>

>> Portugal

>>

>> |

>>

>> +27.0%

>>

>> Romania [5]

>>

>> |

>>

>> -8.0%

>>

>> Slovakia

>>

>> |

>>

>> -8.0%

>>

>> Slovenia [6]

>>

>> |

>>

>> -8.0%

>>

>> Spain

>>

>> |

>>

>> +15.0%

>>

>> Sweden

>>

>> |

>>

>> +4.0%

>>

>> Turkey

>>

>> |

>>

>>           * United Kingdom

>>

>> |

>>

>> -12.5%

>>

>> EU-15 (pre-2004 EU Member States)

>>

>> |

>>

>> -8.0%

>>

>> [1] The base year for Bulgaria is 1988.

>>

>> [2] In Commission Decision 2006/944/EC determining the respective emission
levels allocated to the Community and each of its Member States under the
Kyoto Protocol, the respective emission levels were expressed in terms of
tonnes of CO2-equivalent. In connection with Council Decision 2002/358/EC, the
Council of Environment Ministers and the Commission have, in a joint
statement, agreed to take into account inter alia the assumptions in Denmark's
statement to the Council Conclusions of 16-17 June 1998 relating to base-year
emissions in 2006. In 2006, it was decided to postpone a decision on this
until after all Community and Member State initial reports have been reviewed
under the Kyoto Protocol.

>>

>> [3] The base year for Hungary is the average of 1985-1987.

>>

>> [4] The base year for Poland is 1988.

>>

>> [5] The base year for Romania is 1989.

>>

>> [6] The base year for Slovenia is 1986.

>>

>> Detailed information on base-year levels is available from EEA report on
greenhouse gas emissions trends and projections in Europe.

>>

>> #### Related policy documents

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Kyoto Protocol to the UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change

>>  
>>

>> Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change; adopted at COP3 in Kyoto, Japan, on 11 December 1997

>>  
>>                 >>                       * UNFCCC

>>  
>>

>> UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories

>>

>> ### Methodology

>>

>> #### Methodology for indicator calculation

>>

>> The UNFCCC requires precise and regularly updated inventories of greenhouse
gas emissions from industrialized countries, using comparable methodologies.
To estimate anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions, all countries must use the
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories.

>>

>> In order to be agregated into one single figure, emissions of the different
individual gases are translated into CO2 equivalents, using global warming
potentials (GWP) as provided in the IPCC guidelines. GWP are a measure of how
much a given mass of greenhouse gas is estimated to contribute to global
warming.  
>

>>

>> Gas |

>>

>> Global warming potential (GWP)

>>

>> ---|---  
>  carbon dioxine | 1  
>  methane | 21  
>  nitrous oxide | 310  
>  sulphur hexafluoride | 23900

>>

>> HFCs and PFCs comprise a large number of different gases that have
different GWPs. Countries report HFC and PFC in Mt CO2-equivalent.

>>

>> All total emissions exclude greenhouse gas emissions and removals from land
use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) activities.

>>

>> #### Methodology for gap filling

>>

>> The EC GHG inventory is compiled by using the inventory submissions of the
EC Member States. If a Member State does not submit all data required for the
compilation of the EC inventory, estimates for data missing for that Member
State are made. In the following cases gap filling is made:  
>

>>  
>>                 >>                       * To complete specific years in
the GHG inventory time-series for

>>  
>>

>> a specific Member State (for the most recent inventory year(s), for the
base year or for some years of the time series from 1990 to the most recent
year);

>>  
>>                 >>                       * To complete individual source
categories for individual Member

>>  
>>

>> States that did not estimate specific source categories for any year of the
inventory time series. Gap filling methods are used for major gaps when it is
highly certain that emissions from these source categories exist in the Member
States concerned;

>>  
>>                 >>                       * To provide complete background
data tables for the European

>>  
>>

>> Community when some Member States only provided sectoral and summary
tables. (In this case, the gap filling methods are used to further
disaggregate the emission estimates provided by Member States.)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * To enable the presentation of
consistent trends for the EC.

>>  
>>

>> For data gaps in Member States’ inventory submissions, a gap-filling
procedure is applied in accordance with the implementing provisions under
Council Decision No 280/2004/EC for missing emission data. The methods used
for gap filling include interpolation, extrapolation and clustering. These
methods are consistent with the adjustment methods described in UNFCCC
Adjustment Guidelines and in the IPCC GPG 2000.

>>

>> #### Methodology references

>>

>> No methodology references available.

>>

>> ### Uncertainties

>>

>> #### Methodology uncertainty

>>

>> **Methodologies to estimate greenhouse gas emissions and removals**

>>

>> **Difference of methodologies between countries**

>>

>> Since Member States use different national methodologies, national activity
data or country-specificemission factors in accordance with IPCC and UNFCCC
guidelines, these methodologies are reflected in the EC GHG inventory data.
The EC believes that it is consistent with the UNFCCC reporting guidelines and
the IPCC good practice guidelines to use different methodologies for one
source category across the EC especially if this helps to reduce uncertainty
and improve consistency of the emissions data provided that each methodology
is consistent with the IPCC good practice guidelines.  
>

>>

>> **GWP**

>>

>> The IPCC suggests that the uncertainty in the total GWP weighted emission
estimates, for most European countries, is likely to be better than +/- 20%.
While uncertainties in the estimates of the non-CO2 gases are larger than
this, the dominance of CO2, with a much lower uncertainty than 20%, in the GWP
emissions results in the overall uncertainty of 20%.

>>

>> #### Data sets uncertainty

>>

>> **Evaluation  
>  **

>>

>> The EEA uses data officially submitted by EU Member States and other EEA
countries which perform their own assessment into uncertainty of reported
data. In accordance with UNFCCC guidelines, the EC and its Member States use
the IPCC Good practice guidance and uncertainty management in national
greenhouse gas inventories, which is consistent with the Revised 1996 IPCC
guidelines for national greenhouse gas inventories. The use of this good
practice guidance by countries is expected to lead to higher quality
inventories and more reliable estimates of the magnitude of absolute and trend
uncertainties in reported GHG inventories.

>>

>> The annual EC GHG inventory report provides a section (1.7) on uncertainty
evaluation. The results suggest that uncertainties at EU-15 level are between
+/- 4% and 8% for total EU-15 greenhouse gas emissions. N2O emissions of
agriculture soils is the source contributing most to the overall uncertainty
of the EC inventory.

>>

>> **Trends**

>>

>> Total EU-27 and EU-15 GHG emission trends are likely to be more accurate
than the individual absolute annual emission estimates, because the annual
values are not independent of each other. The IPCC suggests that the
uncertainty in total GHG emission trends is ~ 4 to 5%. The total GHG emission
estimates are quite reliable and the limited number of interpolations used to
build the indicator do not introduce much uncertainty at the EU level.

>>

>> #### Rationale uncertainty

>>

>> According to the latest scientific evidence available (IPCC Fourth
Assessment Report 'Climate Change 2007'):  
>

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Warming of the climate system is
**unequivocal**.

>>  
>>                       * Most of the observed increase in global average
temperatures

>>  
>>

>> since the mid-20th century is **very likely** due to the observed increase
in anthropogenic greenhouse gas concentrations. Global greenhouse gas
emissions due to human activities have grown since pre-industrial times, with
an increase of 70% between 1970 and 2004. Global atmospheric concentrations of
CO2, methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) have increased markedly as a result
of human activities since 1750 and now far exceed pre-industrial values
determined from ice cores spanning many thousands of years.  
>

>>  
>>                 >>                       * There is **high agreement** and
**much evidence** that with

>>  
>>

>> current climate change mitigation policies and related sustainable
development practices, global GHG emissions will continue to grow over the
next few decades.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Continued GHG emissions at or
above current rates would cause

>>  
>>

>> further warming and induce many changes in the global climate system during
the 21st century that would **very likely** ****be larger than those observed
during the 20th century.

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Anthropogenic warming could lead
to some impacts that are abrupt

>>  
>>

>> or irreversible, depending upon the rate and magnitude of the climate
change.  
>

>>

>> Words in bold represent calibrated expressions of uncertainty and
confidence. Relevant terms are explained in the Box 'Treatment of uncertainty'
in the Introduction of the AR4 Synthesis Report. In particular, a likelihood
**'very likely'** corresponds to a **probability of occurence higher than 90
%**. This uncertainty in specific outcomes is assessed using expert judgment
and statistical analysis of a body of evidence (e.g. observations or model
results).

>>

>> The high confidence in the responsibility of anthropogenic greenhouse gas
emissions for the warming of the climate system reemphasizes the relevance of
monitoring and assessing greenhouse gas emission trends in Europe.

>>

>> ### Data sources

>>  
>>                 >>                       * National emissions reported to
the UNFCCC and to the EU

>>  
>>

>> Greenhouse Gas Monitoring Mechanism  
>  provided by **Directorate-General for Environment (DG ENV)** , **United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)**

>>

>> ## Metadata

>>

>> **Topics** :

>>

>> Climate change mitigation

>>

>> ![information.png](https://www.eea.europa.eu/information.png) Tags:

>>  
>>                 >>                  climate , csi , greenhouse gases , air
, ozone , emissions

>>  
>>

>> **DPSIR** : Pressure  
>  **Typology** : Performance indicator (Type B - Does it matter?)

>>

>> **Indicator codes**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * CSI 010

>>  
>>                       * CLIM 050

>>  
>>

>> ![information.png](https://www.eea.europa.eu/information.png) Geographic
coverage:

>>

>> #### Countries

>>

>> Austria , Belgium , Bulgaria , Cyprus , Czech Republic , Denmark , Estonia
, Finland , France , Germany , Greece , Hungary , Ireland , Italy , Latvia ,
Lithuania , Luxembourg , Malta , Netherlands , Poland , Portugal , Romania ,
Slovakia , Slovenia , Spain , Sweden , United Kingdom

>>

>> #### Dates

>>

>> First draft created:

>>

>> 16 Nov 2007, 04:16 PM

>>

>> Publish date:

>>

>> 21 Feb 2008, 04:00 PM

>>

>> Last modified:

>>

>> 25 Aug 2017, 11:47 AM

>>

>> #### Frequency of updates

>>

>> Updates are scheduled twice per year

>>

>> #### EEA Contact Info

>>

>> François Dejean

>>

>> ## Permalinks

>>

>> Permalink to this version

>>  
>>                 >>                  e118005b613e098f4f0bbc9bacd321a9

>>  
>>

>> Permalink to latest version

>>  
>>                 >>                  IND-37-en

>>  
>>

>> ## Older versions

>>

>> 21 Feb 2008 - Progress to greenhouse gas emission targets

>>

>> 01 Feb 2007 - Greenhouse gas emission trends

>>

>> 01 Feb 2007 - Progress to greenhouse gas emission targets

>>

>> 29 Nov 2005 - Greenhouse gas emission trends

>>

>> 29 Nov 2005 - Progress to greenhouse gas emission targets

>>

>> ##### Document Actions

>>

>> ## Share with others

>>  
>>                 >>                       *           *           *
*           *           * |

>>  
>>                       * ![RSS feed of this
listing](https://www.eea.europa.eu/rss.gif)

>>  
>>                       * ![RDF](https://www.eea.europa.eu/rdf.png)

>>  
>>                       * ![Metadata sheet on

>>  
>>

>> semantic](https://www.eea.europa.eu/book_open.png)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ![Download as

>>  
>>

>> PDF](https://www.eea.europa.eu/++resource++eea.pdf.images/download-pdf.png)  
>  ---|---

>>

>> **For references** , please go to https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-
maps/indicators/greenhouse-gas-emission-trends/greenhouse-gas-emission-trends-
assessment-2 or scan the QR code.

>>

>> PDF generated on 07 Jun 2019, 05:54 AM

>>

>> ![EEA Page URL QR](https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-

maps/indicators/greenhouse-gas-emission-trends/greenhouse-gas-emission-trends-

assessment-2/@@eeaqrcode)

>>

>> Filed under: climate, csi, greenhouse gases, air, ozone, emissions

>>

>> ## Eionet

>>

>> European Environment Information and Observation Network (Eionet)

>>

>> ## The EEA also contributes to

>>

>> BISE | Biodiversity Information System for Europe  
>  ---|---  
>  Climate-ADAPT | Climate Adaptation Platform  
>  Copernicus In Situ | Copernicus in situ component  
>  Copernicus Land | Copernicus land monitoring  
>  European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register | E-PRTR  
>  ---|---  
>  Information Platform for Chemical Monitoring | IPCHEM  
>  Marine Water Information System for Europe | WISE-Marine  
>  Fresh Water Information System for Europe | WISE-FreshWater

>>

>> ## Follow us

>>

>> Sign up to receive our news notifications  
>  and our quarterly e-newsletter

>>

>> ## Contact us

>>

>> Kongens Nytorv 6  
>  1050 Copenhagen K

>>

>> Phone number:  
>  (+45) 33 36 71 00

>>

>> Ask your question via the EEA Forum Media enquiries

>>

>> The EEA is an agency of the European Union

>>

>> Engineered by: EEA Web Team

>>

>> Software updated on _22 May 2019 08:08_ from version _19.5.20_

>>

>> Software version: EEA Plone KGS 19.5.22

>>

>> Code for developers

>>

>> Legal notice

>>

>> Creative commons license

>>

>> **CMS login**

>>

>> ![](https://matomo.eea.europa.eu/piwik.php?idsite=3&rec=1)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

