
>

>> Solubility

>>

>> The definition of solubility is the maximum quantity of solute that can
dissolve in a certain quantity of solvent or quantity of solution at a
specified temperature or pressure (in the case of gaseous solutes). In CHM1045
we discussed solubility as a yes or no quality. But the reality is that almost
every solute is somewhat soluble in every solvent to some measurable degree.

>>

>> As stated in the definition, temperature and pressure play an important
role in determining the degree to which a solute is soluble.

>>

>> **Let's start with temperature:**

>>

>> **For Gases** , solubility decreases as temperature increases (duh...you
have seen water boil, right?) The physical reason for this is that when most
gases dissolve in solution, the process is exothermic. This means that heat is
released as the gas dissolves. This is very similar to the reason that vapor
pressure increases with temperature. Increased temperature causes an increase
in kinetic energy. The higher kinetic energy causes more motion in the gas
molecules which break intermolecular bonds and escape from solution. Check out
the graph below:

>>

>> ![Gas Solubility](174solublegas.gif)

>>

>> As the temperature increases, the solubility of a gas decreases as shown by
the downward trend in the graph.

>>

>> **For solid or liquid solutes** :

>>

>> **CASE I: Decrease in solubility with temperature:**

>>

>> If the heat given off in the dissolving process is greater than the heat
required to break apart the solid, the net dissolving reaction is exothermic
(See the **solution process** ). The addition of more heat (increases
temperature) inhibits the dissolving reaction since excess heat is already
being produced by the reaction. This situation is not very common where an
increase in temperature produces a decrease in solubility. But is the case for
sodium sulfate and calcium hydroxide.

>>

>> ![Salt Solubility](solubility.jpg)

>>

>> **CASE II: Increase in solubility with temperature:**

>>

>> If the heat given off in the dissolving reaction is less than the heat
required to break apart the solid, the net dissolving reaction is endothermic.
The addition of more heat facilitates the dissolving reaction by providing
energy to break bonds in the solid. This is the most common situation where an
increase in temperature produces an increase in solubility for solids.

>>

>> The use of first-aid instant cold packs is an application of this
solubility principle. A salt such as ammonium nitrate is dissolved in water
after a sharp blow breaks the containers for each. The dissolving reaction is
endothermic - requires heat. Therefore the heat is drawn from the
surroundings, the pack feels cold.

>>

>> The effect of temperature on solubility can be explained on the basis of
**Le Chatelier's Principle**. Le Chatelier's Principle states that if a stress
(for example, heat, pressure, concentration of one reactant) is applied to an
equilibrium, the system will adjust, if possible, to minimize the effect of
the stress. This principle is of value in predicting how much a system will
respond to a change in external conditions. Consider the case where the
solubility process is endothermic (heat added). An increase in temperature
puts a stress on the equilibrium condition and causes it to shift to the
right. The stress is relieved because the dissolving process consumes some of
the heat. Therefore, the solubility (concentration) increases with an increase
in temperature. If the process is exothermic (heat given off). A temperature
rise will decrease the solubility by shifting the equilibrium to the left.

>>

>> **Now let's look at pressure:**

>>

>> Solids and liquids show almost no change in solubility with changes in
pressure. But gases are very dependent on the pressure of the system. Gases
dissolve in liquids to form solutions. This dissolution is an equilibrium
process for which an equilibrium constant can be written. For example, the
equilibrium between oxygen gas and dissolved oxygen in water is O2(aq) <=>
O2(g). The equilibrium constant for this equilibrium is K = p(O2)/c(O2). The
form of the equilibrium constant shows that the concentration of a solute gas
in a solution is directly proportional to the partial pressure of that gas
above the solution. This statement, known as **Henry's law** , was first
proposed in 1800 by J.W. Henry as an empirical law well before the development
of our modern ideas of chemical equilibrium.

>>

>> **Henry's Law:**

>>

>> ![Henry's Law](Henrys law.gif)

>>

>> Sg stands for the gas solubility, kH is the Henry's Law constant and Pg is
the partial pressure of the gaseous solute.

>>

>> #### Table: Molar Henry's Law Constants for Aqueous Solutions at 25oC

>>

>> **Gas**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **Constant**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **Constant**

>>

>> ---|---|---

>>

>> |

>>

>> **(Pa/(mol/dm 3))**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **(atm/(mol/dm 3))**

>>

>> **He**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **282.7e6**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **2865**

>>

>> **O 2**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **74.68e6**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **756.7**

>>

>> **N 2**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **155.0e6**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **1600**

>>

>> **H 2**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **121.2e6**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **1228**

>>

>> **CO 2**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **2.937e6**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **29.76**

>>

>> **NH 3**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **5.69e6**

>>

>> |

>>

>> **56.9**

>>

>> The inverse of the Henry's law constant, multiplied by the partial pressure
of the gas above the solution, is the **molar solubility** of the gas. Thus
oxygen at one atmosphere would have a molar solubility of (1/756.7)mol/dm 3 or
1.32 mmol/dm3. Values in this table are calculated from tables of molar
thermodynamic properties of pure substances and aqueous solutes

>>

>> **Summary of Factors Affecting Solubility**

>>

>> Normally, solutes become more soluble in a given solvent at higher
temperatures. One way to predict that trend is to use Le Chatelier's
principle. Because DHsoln is positive for most solutions, the solution
formation reaction is usually endothermic. Therefore, when the temperature is
increased, the solubility of the solute should also increase. However, there
are solutes that do not follow the normal trend of increasing solubility with
increasing temperature. One class of solutes that becomes less soluble with
increasing temperature is the gasses. Nearly every gas becomes less soluble
with increasing temperature.

>>

>> Another property of gaseous solutes in summarized by Henry's law which
predicts that gasses become more soluble when their pressures above a liquid
solution are increased. That property of gaseous solutes can be rationalized
by using Le Chatelier's principle. Imagine that you have a glass of water
inside of a sealed container filler with nitrogen gas. If the size of that
container were suddenly halved, the pressure of nitrogen would suddenly
double. To decrease the pressure of nitrogen above the solution (as is
required by Le Chatelier's principle), more nitrogen gas becomes dissolved in
the glass of water.

>>

>> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

