
>

>> Homepage

>>

>> ## Accessibility links

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Skip to content

>>  
>>                       * Accessibility Help

>>  
>>

>> BBC Account

>>

>> Notifications

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * Sport

>>  
>>                       * Weather

>>  
>>                       * iPlayer

>>  
>>                       * Sounds

>>  
>>                       * CBBC

>>  
>>                       * CBeebies

>>  
>>                       * Food

>>  
>>                       * Bitesize

>>  
>>                       * Arts

>>  
>>                       * Taster

>>  
>>                       * Local

>>  
>>                       * TV

>>  
>>                       * Radio

>>  
>>                       * Three

>>  
>>                       * Menu

>>  
>>

>> Search

>>

>> Search the BBCSearch the BBC

>>

>> News

>>

>> ## BBC News Navigation

>>

>> Sections

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * Video

>>  
>>                       * World

>>  
>>                       * Asia

>>  
>>                       * UK

>>  
>>                       * Business

>>  
>>                       * Tech

>>  
>>                       * Science selected

>>  
>>                       * Stories

>>  
>>                       * Entertainment & Arts

>>  
>>                       * Health

>>  
>>                       * World News TV

>>  
>>                       * In Pictures

>>  
>>                       * Reality Check

>>  
>>                       * Newsbeat

>>  
>>                       * Special Reports

>>  
>>                       * Explainers

>>  
>>                       * The Reporters

>>  
>>                       * Have Your Say

>>  
>>

>> Science & Environment

>>

>> Science & Environment

>>

>> # Growth of city trees can cut air pollution, says report

>>

>> By Mark Kinver Environment reporter, BBC News

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 31 October 2016

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Share this with Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Share this with Messenger

>>  
>>                       * Share this with Twitter

>>  
>>                       * Share this with Email

>>  
>>                       * Share this with Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Share this with WhatsApp

>>  
>>                       * Share this with Messenger

>>  
>>                       * Share this with Twitter

>>  
>>                       * Share

>>  
>>

>> Share this with

>>

>> These are external links and will open in a new window

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Email

>>  
>>

>> Share this with Email

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Facebook

>>  
>>

>> Share this with Facebook

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Messenger

>>  
>>

>> Share this with Messenger

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Messenger

>>  
>>

>> Share this with Messenger

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Twitter

>>  
>>

>> Share this with Twitter

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Pinterest

>>  
>>

>> Share this with Pinterest

>>  
>>                 >>                         * WhatsApp

>>  
>>

>> Share this with WhatsApp

>>  
>>                 >>                         * LinkedIn

>>  
>>

>> Share this with LinkedIn

>>

>> Copy this link

>>

>> https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-37813709

>>

>> Read more about sharing.

>>

>> These are external links and will open in a new window

>>

>> Close share panel

>>

>> ![Person walking through Hyde Park, London \(Getty

Images\)](https://ichef.bbci.co.uk/news/320/cpsprodpb/40BF/production/_92157561_hydeparkautumngetty.jpg)
Image caption Trees are estimated to provide the equivalent of "at least £133
million" of benefits each year in London, such as cutting air pollution, a
study suggests

>>

>> Planting trees is a cost-effective way to tackle urban air pollution, which
is a growing problem for many cities.

>>

>> A study by US-based The Nature Conservancy (TNC) reported than the average
reduction of particulate matter near a tree was between 7% and 24%.

>>

>> Particulate matter (PM) is microscopic particles that become trapped in the
lungs of people breathing polluted air.

>>

>> PM pollution could claim an estimated 6.2 million lives each year by 2050,
the study suggests.

>>

>> Lead author Rob McDonald said that city trees were already providing a lot
of benefits to people living in urban areas.

>>

>> "The average reduction of particulate matter near a tree is between 7-24%,
while the cooling effect is up to 2C (3.6F). There are already tens of
millions of people getting those kinds of benefits," he said.

>>

>> Dr McDonald said the study of the use of trees in 245 cities around the
world compared the cost-effectiveness of trees with other methods of cooling
and cleaning air.

>>

>> "On that front, trees are cost competitive with other options," he told BBC
News.

>>

>> "When you change a bus from diesel to gasoline, for example, you reduce
particulate matter pollution, and trees are certainly in the same ball park."

>>

>> However, the TNC report highlighted that most of the cities featured in the
study were losing more trees than they were gaining.

>>

>> Image copyright TNS

>>

>> According to the UN World Health Organization (WHO), about 90% of the
global population living in cities in 2014 was exposed to particulate matter
that exceeded the WHO air quality guidelines.

>>

>> The UN agency estimates that outdoor air pollution caused three million
premature deaths in 2012, with the vast majority occurring in low- to middle-
income nations.

>>

>> The WHO Health Statistics 2016 says air pollution is "caused by inefficient
energy production, distribution and use, especially in the industrial,
transportation and building sectors, and by poor waste management".

>>

>> It adds that transport systems based primarily on individual motorised
transport can lead to further deterioration in air quality.

>>

>> As everyone within an urban area breathes the same air, the pollution does
not discriminate - both rich and poor are exposed to the dangers. But, it
adds, people living near the source or busy roads are more exposed and more
affected.

>>

>> The WHO says that the air quality in many cities is not monitored, making
it difficult to get an accurate understanding of the global impact of air
pollution.

>>

>> Image copyright TNS

>>

>> Dr McDonald observed: "Trees are by no means a replacement for all the
other things cities need to do in order to clean their air but they are part
of the suite of tools that cities can draw on.

>>

>> "We also looked at how much more trees could help if we planted more trees.
We found that there was a lot more scope there. All of the cities we looked
at, if all the people in them spent an extra US $4 a year on planting trees,
you could save between 11,000 and 36,000 lives each year. This is mostly as a
result of having cleaner air.

>>

>> "As well as the avoided mortality, there is even more avoided
hospitalisation, and it will benefit tens of millions of folks.

>>

>> "In this urban century when there are going to be an extra two billion
people in cities, smart cities should be thinking about how nature and trees
can be part of the solution to keep air healthy."

>>

>> However, planting trees in an urban setting is not without potential
pitfalls. One is regarding the flow of air in heavily polluted streets,
particularly ones with large volumes of traffic. Thick canopies can limit the
circulation of air, trapping the poor quality air at low levels, where people
breath.

>>

>> Dr McDonald said this was an issue that the report considered.

>>

>> "Air flow certainly matters," he said. "What we talk about in the report is
a planting strategy. For example, on streets where there is a lot of traffic
and particulate matter, the advice is to ensure there is enough space between
your trees to ensure that you are still getting enough air flow in order to
prevent that negative outcome.

>>

>> "However, on most residential streets, where there is relatively less
traffic, we found that the issue of air flow blockage is much less of an
issue."

>>

>> ## Forgotten landscape

>>

>> Although trees have long been part of urban life, either by design or
consumed by expanding urban areas, they had been sidelined in the second half
of the 20th Century.

>>

>> In a 2014 report, following what was described as the "largest city tree
survey of its kind", it was calculated that London's trees provided "at least
£133 million of benefits every year in terms of air pollution removal, carbon
sequestration and reducing the amount of water going into drains".

>>

>> One charity that aims to promote the arboriculture additions to urban
environments is UK-based Trees for Cities.

>>

>> Describing its missions, the charity says: "We focus on planting trees
where the social and environmental impact on local people is greatest.

>>

>> "In London this might mean planting trees to clean the air and making our
communities healthier places to live, whilst in Addis Ababa it's planting
fruit trees for food and sustainable livelihoods."

>>

>> By raising awareness of the ecosystem services they can play, the TNC
report's authors hope that urban trees can become an integral part of
cityscapes once again.

>>

>> "One of our goals outlined in the report is to remind cities that you have
the parks or urban forestry department on one side and the health department
on the other side. On this issue at least, they need to be talking to each
other," Dr McDonald suggested.

>>

>> "I am really hopeful that if more cities start thinking that way then we
will see a rebirth in urban tree planting."

>>

>> Follow Mark on Twitter.

>>

>> ## Related Topics

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Air pollution

>>  
>>

>> ## Share this story About sharing

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Email

>>  
>>                       * Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Messenger

>>  
>>                       * Messenger

>>  
>>                       * Twitter

>>  
>>                       * Pinterest

>>  
>>                       * WhatsApp

>>  
>>                       * LinkedIn

>>  
>>

>> ## More on this story

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Green spaces worth £2.2bn to
public health in England

>>  
>>

>> 20 September 2016

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Collaboration needed on nature
and wellbeing links

>>  
>>

>> 27 January 2015

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Green spaces have lasting
positive effect on well-being

>>  
>>

>> 12 January 2014

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Green streets can cut pollution,
says study

>>  
>>

>> 18 July 2012

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Urban trees 'help migrating
birds'

>>  
>>

>> 21 May 2010

>>

>> ## Related Internet links

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The Nature Conservancy

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Trees for Cities

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * World Health Organization

>>  
>>

>> The BBC is not responsible for the content of external Internet sites

>>

>> ## Top Stories

>>

>> **'State actor' behind UAE tanker attacks**

>>

>> A "state actor" is blamed by a United Arab Emirates report for attacks on
oil tankers in the Gulf.

>>

>> 7 June 2019

>>

>> **Mexico to deploy forces on Guatemala border**

>>

>> 7 June 2019

>>

>> **Putin shrugs off D-Day anniversary snub**

>>

>> 6 June 2019

>>

>> ## Features

>>

>> ### How fish and shrimps could be recruited as underwater spies

>>

>> Video

>>

>> ### Inside the city liberated from militants

>>

>> Video

>>

>> ### Women's World Cup in numbers

>>

>> ### ABC police raids highlight risks of whistleblowing

>>

>> ### The Indian army general detained as a foreigner in India

>>

>> ### EU game-plans as waits for new UK prime minister

>>

>> ### The rare protests in a country that bans dissent

>>

>> ### Should Parkland school shooting cop be jailed?

>>

>> ### BBC Reel: How thinking positively can have a negative effect

>>

>> ## Elsewhere on the BBC

>>

>> ### Lyrics quiz

>>

>> Have you been getting these songs wrong?

>>

>> Full article Lyrics quiz

>>

>> ### Feeling hot

>>

>> What happens to your body in extreme heat?

>>

>> Full article Feeling hot

>>

>> Why you can trust BBC News

>>

>> ## BBC News Navigation

>>

>> Sections

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * Video

>>  
>>                       * World

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * World Home

>>  
>>                         * Africa

>>  
>>                         * Australia

>>  
>>                         * Europe

>>  
>>                         * Latin America

>>  
>>                         * Middle East

>>  
>>                         * US & Canada

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Asia

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * Asia Home

>>  
>>                         * China

>>  
>>                         * India

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * UK

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * UK Home

>>  
>>                         * England

>>  
>>                         * N. Ireland

>>  
>>                         * Scotland

>>  
>>                         * Wales

>>  
>>                         * Politics

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Business

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                         * Business Home

>>  
>>                         * Market Data

>>  
>>                         * Global Trade

>>  
>>                         * Companies

>>  
>>                         * Entrepreneurship

>>  
>>                         * Technology of Business

>>  
>>                         * Connected World

>>  
>>                         * Global Education

>>  
>>                         * Economy

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Tech

>>  
>>                       * Science selected

>>  
>>                       * Stories

>>  
>>                       * Entertainment & Arts

>>  
>>                       * Health

>>  
>>                       * World News TV

>>  
>>                       * In Pictures

>>  
>>                       * Reality Check

>>  
>>                       * Newsbeat

>>  
>>                       * Special Reports

>>  
>>                       * Explainers

>>  
>>                       * The Reporters

>>  
>>                       * Have Your Say

>>  
>>

>> ## BBC News Services

>>  
>>                 >>                       * On your mobile

>>  
>>                       * On your connected tv

>>  
>>                       * Get news alerts

>>  
>>                       * Contact BBC News

>>  
>>

>> ## Explore the BBC

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * Sport

>>  
>>                       * Weather

>>  
>>                       * iPlayer

>>  
>>                       * Sounds

>>  
>>                       * CBBC

>>  
>>                       * CBeebies

>>  
>>                       * Food

>>  
>>                       * Bitesize

>>  
>>                       * Arts

>>  
>>                       * Taster

>>  
>>                       * Local

>>  
>>                       * TV

>>  
>>                       * Radio

>>  
>>                       * Three

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Terms of Use

>>  
>>                       * About the BBC

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Cookies

>>  
>>                       * Accessibility Help

>>  
>>                       * Parental Guidance

>>  
>>                       * Contact the BBC

>>  
>>                       * Get Personalised Newsletters

>>  
>>

>> _Copyright (C) 2019 BBC._ The BBC is not responsible for the content of
external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.

>>

>> ![](//ssc.api.bbc.com/?c1=2&c2=19293874&ns_site=bbc&name=)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

