
>

>> ![nexus](https://blog.iiasa.ac.at/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2015/11/nexus-

logo2.png)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * About

>>  
>>                       * Contact

>>  
>>                       * IIASA website

>>  
>>

>> Select Page

>>

>> # Falling fertility rates: Why do wealthier people have fewer children?

>>

>> Aug 1, 2017 | Demography, Young Scientists

>>

>> By Parul Tewari, IIASA Science Communication Fellow 2017

>>

>> ![](https://blog.iiasa.ac.at/wp-

content/uploads/sites/5/shutterstock_334181882.jpg)

>>

>> © KonstantinChristian I Shutterstock

>>

>> Faced with a sharp decline in the global fertility levels over the last few
decades, many countries today are confronted with the problem of an aging
population. This could translate into an economic threat: higher health-care
costs for the elderly coupled with a shrinking working population will lead to
lower income-tax revenues to provide for these rising costs. This can already
be seen in countries like Japan, Spain, and Germany. With an increasing number
of elderly dependents and not enough workers to replace them, their social
support systems have become increasingly strained.

>>

>> Even though in the last few decades there has been an increase in
individual incomes, researchers have observed a negative correlation between
the increased wealth and the number of children people choose to have. Sara
Loo, as part of the 2017 Young Scientists Summer Program (YSSP), seeks to
explore why people are choosing to have fewer children as their social and
economic conditions change for the better.

>>

>> According to a report titled World Fertility Patterns 2015, global
fertility levels have gone down from just above five children in 1950 to
around 2.5 children per woman in 2015. In the figure below, ‘total fertility
rate’ refers to the average number of children that are born to a woman over
her lifetime.

>>

>> ![](https://blog.iiasa.ac.at/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/TFR_Graph1.png)

>>

>> It might seem counterintuitive that better living standards would be linked
to decreased fertility. One way to explain it is through the lens of cultural
evolution. Loo explains that culture is constantly changing – be it beliefs,
knowledge, skills, or customs. This change is reflected in people’s day-to-day
behaviors and affects their choices, both professional and personal.
Importantly, beliefs and customs are acquired not only from people’s parents
but are largely influenced by their peers – friends and colleagues.

>>

>> One of the ways in which cultural evolution has affected fertility rates is
resulting from the trade-off between the number of children and the quality of
life that parents desire to give each of them, says Loo. As both men and women
vie for well-paying jobs to attain a higher standard of living, and as they
compete for such jobs based on their education, the resources parents invest
into each child’s upbringing, including education and inheritance, are
crucial. Even the time parents can give to their children becomes an expensive
currency.

>>

>> This makes for a highly competitive environment in which everyone is trying
to achieve a higher status, in order to provide better opportunities for their
children. When parents have fewer children, this means giving each of them a
greater chance of achieving higher status.

>>

>> Loo elaborates that as everyone competes to get their children to the top
of the socioeconomic ladder, this necessitates a higher investment per child,
both monetarily and otherwise. The theory of cultural evolution in this case
thus predicts lowered fertility as competition for well-paying jobs
intensifies with a country’s development.

>>

>> However, it is not that such parental strategies apply equally to all
segments of a population, says Evolution and Ecology Program Director Ulf
Dieckmann, who is supervising Loo’s research at the institute over the summer.
He explains that it is therefore helpful to look at fertility in relation to
people’s socioeconomic status, instead of just looking at a population’s
average fertility rate over time.

>>

>> This can give telling insights. “In many pre-industrial societies, the rich
had greater numbers of children, and if anybody had less than replacement-
level fertility, it was the really poor people who could not afford to raise
as many children. It was over time that this correlation changed from positive
to negative when richer people decided to have fewer children: if they had too
many children, they could not afford to invest as much per child as was needed
to secure maintaining or raising the children’s socioeconomic status. This has
led to a reversal of the traditional pattern: in developed societies,
fertility has been shown to drop at high socioeconomic status,” says
Dieckmann.

>>

>> Complementing existing research on the fertility impacts of urbanization
and of women’s education and liberation, Loo plans to explore how the
aforementioned mechanisms of cultural evolution can explain the observed
negative correlation between socioeconomic status and fertility. Her goal is
to do so using a mathematical model that can account for both economic trends
and cultural trends as two key processes influencing fertility rates.

>>

>> _About the researcher_

>>

>> Sara Loo is currently a third-year PhD candidate at the University of
Sydney, Australia, where her research focuses on the evolution of uniquely
human behaviors. Loo is working with the Evolution and Ecology Program at
IIASA over the summer, with Professor Karl Sigmund and Program Director Ulf
Dieckmann as her supervisors for the project.

>>

>> _This article gives the views of the author, and not the position of the
Nexus blog, nor of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis._

>>

>> ### Share this:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Click to share on Facebook
(Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Pocket (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to print (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

>>  
>>                       * ### Like this:

>>  
>>

>> Like Loading...

>>

>> ### _Related_

>>

>> #### Recent Posts

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 5 years of Vietnam membership at
IIASA

>>  
>>                       * Facilitating sustainable energy transitions at the
top of the

>>  
>>

>> world

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Bringing some light into the
dark

>>  
>>                       * Exploring risk in development indicators

>>  
>>                       * Exploring urban-rural differences in health risks
from extreme

>>  
>>

>> temperatures

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Running global models in a
castle in Europe

>>  
>>                       * Eat healthy and sustainably, don’t leave yourself
behind

>>  
>>                       * Shaping my scientific career

>>  
>>                       * 15 years of Egypt membership at IIASA

>>  
>>

>> #### Categories

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Air Pollution (10)

>>  
>>                       * Alumni (36)

>>  
>>                       * Arctic (3)

>>  
>>                       * China (1)

>>  
>>                       * Citizen Science (13)

>>  
>>                       * Climate (8)

>>  
>>                       * Climate Change (28)

>>  
>>                       * Communication (12)

>>  
>>                       * Data and Methods (10)

>>  
>>                       * Demography (32)

>>  
>>                       * Economics (5)

>>  
>>                       * Ecosystems (11)

>>  
>>                       * Education (5)

>>  
>>                       * Egypt (1)

>>  
>>                       * Energy & Climate (31)

>>  
>>                       * Environment (25)

>>  
>>                       * Eurasia (5)

>>  
>>                       * Evolution (3)

>>  
>>                       * Food (8)

>>  
>>                       * Food & Water (11)

>>  
>>                       * Health (2)

>>  
>>                       * History (3)

>>  
>>                       * IIASA Network (18)

>>  
>>                       * India (1)

>>  
>>                       * Postdoc (13)

>>  
>>                       * Poverty & Equity (14)

>>  
>>                       * Risk and resilience (27)

>>  
>>                       * Science and Art (10)

>>  
>>                       * Science and Policy (29)

>>  
>>                       * Sustainable Development (18)

>>  
>>                       * Systems Analysis (25)

>>  
>>                       * United Kingdom (2)

>>  
>>                       * USA (1)

>>  
>>                       * Vietnam (1)

>>  
>>                       * Water (12)

>>  
>>                       * Wellbeing (1)

>>  
>>                       * Women in Science (17)

>>  
>>                       * Young Scientists (50)

>>  
>>

>> #### Tags

>>

>> adaptation advanced systems analysis africa agriculture air pollution
Alpbach alumni arctic Austria citizen science climate climate change
communication crowdsourcing data demography disaster economics education
emissions energy environment europe flood food forest health iiasa math policy
population poverty research resilience risk science Science-policy sdgs
sustainability Sustainable Development systems analysis vulnerability water
young scientists yssp

>>

>> #### Archives

>>

>> Archives Select Month May 2019 (4) April 2019 (1) March 2019 (3) February
2019 (2) January 2019 (5) December 2018 (2) November 2018 (4) October 2018 (5)
September 2018 (3) August 2018 (6) July 2018 (8) June 2018 (5) May 2018 (3)
April 2018 (1) March 2018 (3) January 2018 (3) December 2017 (2) November 2017
(4) October 2017 (1) September 2017 (6) August 2017 (10) July 2017 (5) June
2017 (2) May 2017 (3) April 2017 (4) March 2017 (1) February 2017 (4) January
2017 (3) December 2016 (1) November 2016 (5) October 2016 (6) September 2016
(6) August 2016 (5) July 2016 (4) June 2016 (3) May 2016 (2) April 2016 (2)
March 2016 (7) February 2016 (6) January 2016 (1) December 2015 (4) November
2015 (4) October 2015 (6) September 2015 (7) August 2015 (4) July 2015 (1)
June 2015 (4) May 2015 (1) April 2015 (3) March 2015 (2) February 2015 (6)
January 2015 (2) December 2014 (3) November 2014 (3) October 2014 (1)
September 2014 (3) August 2014 (2) July 2014 (2) June 2014 (3) May 2014 (2)
April 2014 (4) March 2014 (4) February 2014 (3) January 2014 (3) December 2013
(2) November 2013 (5) October 2013 (3) September 2013 (4) August 2013 (2) July
2013 (1)

>>

>> Search for:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Twitter

>>  
>>

>> Designed by IIASA | DISCLAMER

>>

>> %d bloggers like this:

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic *[DOI]: digital object
identifier

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier

