
>

>> The Keeling Curve __ Navigation

>>  
>>                 >>                       * History

>>  
>>                       * Measurement Notes

>>  
>>                       * Paleoclimate

>>  
>>                       * Videos

>>  
>>                       * State of Climate: Other Indicators

>>  
>>                       * Support CO2 and O2 Measurements at Scripps!

>>  
>>                       * PDF Downloads

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * History

>>  
>>                       * Measurement Notes

>>  
>>                       * Paleoclimate

>>  
>>                       * Videos

>>  
>>                       * State of Climate: Other Indicators

>>  
>>                       * Support CO2 and O2 Measurements at Scripps!

>>  
>>                       * PDF Downloads

>>  
>>

>> ![](https://scripps.ucsd.edu/programs/shorestations/wp-

content/uploads/sites/96/2015/12/logo_calboating_300h_400w.png)

>>

>> ![](https://scripps.ucsd.edu/programs/keelingcurve/wp-

content/uploads/sites/154/2014/06/SQUARE_WAIS2009-342.jpg)

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> # How do CO2 levels relate to ice ages and sea-level?

>>

>> In Paleoclimate by Rob MonroeJune 20, 2014

>>

>> ![Core of ancient Antarctic

ice](http://scripps.ucsd.edu/programs/keelingcurve/wp-

content/uploads/sites/28/2014/06/LARGE_KC40_WAIS2009-342-300x161.jpg)

>>

>> An ice core collected by the DISC (Deep Ice Sheet Coring) drill from the
West Antarctic Ice Sheet

>>

>> In a recent comment, a reader posted a graphic in which CO2 and sea-level
rise appear to be correlated throughout the last 700,000 years. While these
two factors do appear to rise and fall together, what drives these two factors
over the period of 700,000 years is very different from those over the last 50
– 100 years. As a result, this correlation is not a reliable guide to the
cause and effect relationship between CO2 and sea-level rise in recent years.

>>

>> Until the Industrial Revolution, melting of snow and ice at the end of
cyclical glacial periods was driven by changes in the Earth’s orbit. As snow
and ice melted on the planet, the albedo, or reflectivity, of the earth
declined, with land and ocean absorbing more heat from the sun (think the
reflectivity of cars in a parking lot versus the hot blacktop of the parking
lot itself). As the planet slowly warmed, a warmer and better-mixed ocean
released CO2 into the atmosphere, which amplified the warming that was already
in progress. In all, temperature typically increased by 6°C (11° F) over
thousands of years during these interglacial periods, and one third of this
increase was a result of the CO2 that outgassed from the ocean once warming
began. Therefore, CO2 was not the initial cause of melting ice on the planet.
It merely amplified a signal that was already in progress.

>>

>> By contrast, as humans burn fossil fuels, we are creating a new driver of
snow and ice melt and accompanying sea-level rise. This time, additional CO2
entering the atmosphere is coming from sources of carbon that had previously
been sequestered in fuels such as oil and gas. We know from basic physics that
CO2 traps heat. The phenomenon is perhaps best demonstrated by Earth’s
neighbor Venus. If we lived on Venus, the computer you’re reading this post on
now would be melting. That’s because Venus has 100,000 times the amount of CO2
in its atmosphere as Earth does and its average temperature of 462° C (863° F)
is high enough to melt lead.

>>

>> Thus, while in the past sea-level rise as a result of melting glaciers and
thermal expansion was driven by changes in Earth’s orbit and amplified by
oceanic CO2 released after initial warming, today anthropogenic CO2 is
directly driving this melting and sea-level rise.

>>

>> **– Emily Kelly is a 6th year student in the laboratory of Scripps marine
biologist Jennifer Smith**

>>

>> A daily record of atmospheric carbon dioxide from Scripps Institution of
Oceanography at UC San Diego

>>

>> Permissions and Data Sources

>>

>> Search

>>

>> Keeling Curve updates

>>

>> #### Latest Posts

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Animation of Keeling Curve
History Updated to Include 2019

>>  
>>

>> Milestone

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Carbon Dioxide Levels Hit Record
Peak in May

>>  
>>                       * Is the Current Rise in CO2 Definitely Caused by
Human

>>  
>>

>> Activities?

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Another Climate Milestone Falls
at Mauna Loa Observatory

>>  
>>                       * Carbon Dioxide in the Atmosphere Hits Record High
Monthly

>>  
>>

>> Average

>>

>> #### Categories

>>

>> Categories Select Category Climate in the News Daily Measurements Home
Keeling Curve History Measurement Notes Outreach Paleoclimate Uncategorized
Videos

>>

>> #### Archives

>>

>> Archives Select Month June 2019 September 2018 June 2018 May 2018 April
2018 February 2018 October 2017 September 2017 September 2016 August 2016 June
2016 May 2016 April 2016 March 2016 November 2015 October 2015 September 2015
June 2015 May 2015 April 2015 February 2015 October 2014 September 2014 August
2014 July 2014 June 2014 April 2014 March 2014 February 2014 January 2014
December 2013 October 2013 August 2013 July 2013 June 2013 May 2013 April 2013
March 2013 February 2013

>>

>> ![scripps oceanography](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sio-

cdn/images/header/logo/headerSIO.png) ![uc san

diego](https://s3.amazonaws.com/sio-cdn/images/header/logo/ucsd-new-WHITE.png)

>>

>> Scripps Institution of Oceanography, UC San Diego | Terms of Use | Login

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

