
>

>> ![*](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6035737&cv=2.0&cj=1)

>>

>> ## Express. Home of the Daily and Sunday Express.

>>

>> ![express_logo](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-

horizontal.gif)

>>

>> 13°C

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Find us on Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Follow us on Twitter

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Login

>>  
>>                       * Register

>>  
>>

>> Apps Puzzles Horoscopes Discounts Shop Paper

>>  
>>                 >>                       * HOME

>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * Showbiz & TV

>>  
>>                       * Sport

>>  
>>                       * Comment

>>  
>>                       * Finance

>>  
>>                       * Travel

>>  
>>                       * Entertainment

>>  
>>                       * Life & Style

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * UK

>>  
>>                       * World

>>  
>>                       * Politics

>>  
>>                       * Royal

>>  
>>                       * Science

>>  
>>                       * Weather

>>  
>>                       * Weird

>>  
>>                       * Nature

>>  
>>                       * Sunday

>>  
>>                       * Scotland

>>  
>>                       * Home

>>  
>>                       * News

>>  
>>                       * Science

>>  
>>

>> # Climate Change - the REAL inconvenient truth: Scientist claims global

>>

>> warming is NATURAL

>>

>> ### CLIMATE change is a natural phenomenon, according to a shock new report

>>

>> which throws a spanner in the works of those who say global warming is a
result of man-made activity.

>>

>> By Sean Martin Sean Martin

>>

>> PUBLISHED: 16:22, Fri, Aug 25, 2017 | UPDATED: 17:07, Fri, Aug 25, 2017

>>

>> 0

>>

>> ![global warming

natural](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/preloaderbig.gif)GETTY

>>

>> Climate change is NATURAL: Scientist blows global warming debate WIDE OPEN

>>

>> Well respected Australian scientist Jennifer Marohasy says global
temperatures would have still risen without the industrial revolution -
essentially dismissing the claim that man is responsible for climate change.

>>

>> Most scientists will say climate change is caused by an increase of CO2
being ploughed into the atmosphere thanks to the industrial revolution.

>>

>> But Dr Marohasy along with fellow scientist Dr John Abbot state this
assumption is based on a model which was decided almost 120 years ago.

>>

>> That model, mustered up by Swedish scientist Svante Arrhenius who is
considered one of the godfathers of physical chemistry, claimed carbon dioxide
absorbs infrared radiation.

>>

>> ### Related articles

>>  
>>                 >>                       *

>>  
>>

>> ![](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/dynamic/151/285x190/836110_1.jpg)

>>

>> Earth Overshoot Day is TODAY: We've used 2017's natural resources

>>  
>>                 >>                       *

>>  
>>

>> ![](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/dynamic/151/285x190/838420_1.jpg)

>>

>> WEATHER WARNING: Extreme heat to kill 150,000 across Europe

>>

>> ![ice](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/preloaderbig.gif)GETTY

>>

>> The ice caps are melting due to global warming

>>

>> While the fact that carbon dioxide absorbs infrared radiation is not
disputed, what Dr Maloney and co argue is that it is not correlated correctly
to a heating globe.

>>

>> The scientists add little work has been done in the following century to
update this model.

>>

>> But to correctly analyse the effect of CO2 in the atmosphere, they began
collecting data which offered ways to measure temperatures over the last 2,000
years such as tree rings and coral cores.

>>

>> ![power

station](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/preloaderbig.gif)GETTY

>>

>> The industrial revolution may not be to blame

>>

>> Dr Marohasy and Dr Abbot published a paper in the journal GeoResJ outlining
their study of climate change using neural network technology.

>>

>> They fed this data into a machine learning neural network which offered
prediction patterns of temperatures for the last two millennia if there was
not extra CO2.

>>

>> The computer predicted temperatures which almost exactly match what global
temperatures have been, even if there was not an industrial revolution.

>>

>> They also found the world was warmer during the Medieval times.

>>

>> Dr Marohasy wrote on her personal blog there would have also been a spike
in temperatures from 1983-2012 - something which scientists have indeed
observed.

>>

>> The scientists says global warming is a natural phenomenon which heats the
globe in cycles - much like how Ice Ages have cooled Earth throughout history.

>>

>> In reference to her study published in GeoResJ, Dr Marohasy writes on her
blog: "The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) estimates warming
of approximately 1°C, but attributes this all to industrialisation."

>>

>> ![Earth](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/preloaderbig.gif)GETTY

>>

>> Earth would be heating regardless of the industrial revolution, says Dr
Marohasy

>>

>> She adds: "To be clear, while mainstream climate science is replete with
published proxy temperature studies showing that temperatures have cycled up
and down over the last 2,000 years - spiking during the Medieval Warm Period
and then again recently to about 1980 - the official IPCC reconstructions
(which underpin the Paris Accord) deny such cycles.

>>

>> "Through this denial, leaders from within this much-revered community can
claim that there is something unusual about current temperatures: that we have
catastrophic global warming from industrialisation."

>>

>> Dr Marohasy, whose long list of credentials include setting up The Climate
Modelling Laboratory and director of the Australian Environment Foundation
until 2008, scathingly concludes: "The science is far from settled."

>>

>> ### Air pollution across the world

>>

>> Tue, May 22, 2018

>>

>> ## Take a look through these stunning drone images, highlighting the
effects

>>

>> of pollution on planet earth but also the opportunities to tackle this
scary problem.

>>

>> Play slideshow

>>

>> ![Fawley Refinery in the New

Forest](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/dynamic/galleries/x701/84492.jpg)

>>

>> Mark Baker

>>

>> 1 of 11

>>

>> The tanks and stacks of Fawley Refinery in the New Forest

>>

>> However, Nasa, for one, has repeatedly stated that global warming is a
result of human activity, saying that there is a "95 per cent probability"
that it is caused by man.

>>

>> Nasa's Global Climate Change Office has said: "The heat-trapping nature of
carbon dioxide and other gases was demonstrated in the mid-19th century. Their
ability to affect the transfer of infrared energy through the atmosphere is
the scientific basis of many instruments flown by Nasa.

>>

>> "There is no question that increased levels of greenhouse gases must cause
the Earth to warm in response."

>>

>> ### Related articles

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Humanity will go EXTINCT in 100
years, as ‘IT’S TOO LATE’

>>  
>>                       * Widespread chaos to follow rising sea levels, warns
ex-Nasa boss

>>  
>>                       * Was Trump RIGHT? Paris Climate Agreement WON’T
WORK, says shock

>>  
>>

>> study

>>

>> Climate change Global warming

>>

>> ### Most read in Science

>>

>> ### Latest videos

>>

>> ![Outlander season 5 spoilers Jamie Fraser danger Sam Heughan Starz Amazon

Prime video](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-

horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Outlander season 5 spoilers: Jamie Fraser in danger as Sam Heughan

>>

>> REVEALS problems ahead?

>>

>> ![Dr John dead cause of death how did Dr John die

age](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Dr John dead: Legendary musician dies aged 77 after heart attack

>>

>> ![Jessica Jones season 3 trailer new villain Gregory Salinger Foolkiller

Netflix video](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-

horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Jessica Jones season 3: Trailer REVEALS Jessica to die at hands of new

>>

>> supervillain?

>>

>> ![prime minister poll results express theresa may worst pm in

history](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### ‘She DIDN’T try hard enough’ - May tops Express.co.uk poll as WORST

>>

>> British PM in history

>>

>> ![peterborough by election results who won local elections latest

results](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Peterborough by-election results: Who won local elections? Latest

>>

>> results

>>

>> ![weather forecast long range heatwave warning us weather latest

update](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### HEATWAVE WARNING: THOUSANDS to die across US if temperatures rise just

>>

>> three degrees

>>

>> ![Alien life news aliens on exomoons moon water astronomer

exoplanets](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-

horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Alien life BOMBSHELL: Astronomer says look HERE for proof of alien
life

>>

>>           * ‘I’m hopeful’

>>

>> ![spacex starlink satellite elon musk alien life discovery space

news](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Alien hunt is being RUINED by Elon Musk and SpaceX’s 12,000
SATELLITES,

>>

>> astronomers claim

>>

>> ![antarctica nasa discovery al gore climate change emperor penguin

spt](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Antarctica: How NASA made SHOCKING discovery after scanning ice with

>>

>> mapping technology

>>

>> ![Black hole astronomers accretion disc Milky Way supermassive black hole

space news](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-

horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Black hole SHOCK: Astronomers snap 10 MILLION degree hot gas around

>>

>> Milky Way black hole

>>

>> ![NASA Moon landing Apollo 11 what President Richard Nixon tell Neil

Armstrong Moon](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-

horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### NASA Moon landing: What did President Richard Nixon tell Neil
Armstrong

>>

>> on the Moon?

>>

>> ![nasa moon landing apollo 11 neil armstrong buzz aldrin christopher kraft

spt](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### NASA Moon landing: Apollo boss SABOTAGED Buzz Aldrin’s chance to lead:

>>

>> ‘I didn’t like him'

>>

>> ![Solar storm NASA coronal mass ejection space weather Chandra Observatory

](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### SOLAR STORM: NASA snaps first ever Coronal Mass Ejection as star spews

>>

>> 'POWERFUL' energy

>>

>> ![darpa mind brain machine interface us military

telepathy](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-

horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### DARPA mind-machine interface: US military readies TELEPATHIC ‘cyber

>>

>> defence' tech

>>

>> ![NASA asteroid tracker Asteroid 2019 LA bigger Big Ben skim Earth NASA

news](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### NASA asteroid tracker: Asteroid TALLER than Big Ben will skim Earth at

>>

>> 50,000mph THIS WEEK

>>

>> ![yellowstone volcano usgs month long eruption july umbrella ash bury us

spt](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Yellowstone volcano: Why USGS predicted MONTH-LONG eruption in July

>>

>> would bury US in ash

>>

>> ![NASA Moon landing Apollo 11 monsters Moon Neil Armstrong Buzz Aldrin

Michael Collins](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-

horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### NASA Moon landing: How Apollo 11 astronauts saw 'MONSTERS' on the Moon

>>

>>           * 'God it's huge!'

>>

>> ![Solar minimum NASA Sun temperatures sunspots solar flare activity Maunder

Minimum](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Solar minimum is HERE: How past solar activity saw temperatures PLUNGE

>>

>> around the world

>>

>> ![NASA Moon landing Neil Armstrong one small step Apollo 11 nasa

news](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### NASA Moon landing: THIS is what Neil Armstrong saw on the Moon after

>>

>> his 'one small step'

>>

>> ![jupiter nasa how to see planet jupiter moons month june space

news](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### Jupiter at night: How to see the gas giant light up the night skies

>>

>> this month

>>

>> ![dday anniversary normandy landings ww2 full

moon](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/page/placeholder-horizontal.gif)

>>

>> #### D-Day SHOCK: Professor corrects historical BLUNDER on Normandy
landings

>>

>> 75th anniversary

>>

>> SEARCH

>>

>> CONNECT WITH US

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Find us on Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Follow us on Twitter

>>  
>>                       * Check us on Google+

>>  
>>                       * Subscribe to our rss feed

>>  
>>

>> TODAY'S PAPER

>>

>> ![todays-

paper](https://cdn.images.express.co.uk/img/covers/70x91/front_2019-06-07.jpg)

>>

>> Friday, 7th June 2019

>>

>> See today's front and back pages, download the newspaper, order back issues
and use the historic Daily Express newspaper archive.

>>

>> ## News

>>  
>>                 >>                       * UK

>>  
>>                       * World

>>  
>>                       * Politics

>>  
>>                       * Royal

>>  
>>                       * Science

>>  
>>                       * Weather

>>  
>>                       * Weird

>>  
>>                       * Nature

>>  
>>                       * Sunday

>>  
>>                       * Scotland

>>  
>>

>> ## Latest News

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Brexit

>>  
>>                       * European Union

>>  
>>                       * Theresa May

>>  
>>                       * Angela Merkel

>>  
>>                       * Donald Trump

>>  
>>                       * The Queen

>>  
>>                       * Kate Middleton

>>  
>>                       * Meghan Markle

>>  
>>                       * Diesel

>>  
>>                       * Cancer

>>  
>>                       * Diabetes

>>  
>>                       * Dementia

>>  
>>                       * YouTube

>>  
>>

>> ## Showbiz & TV

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Celebrity News

>>  
>>                       * TV & Radio

>>  
>>

>> ## Sport

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Football

>>  
>>                       * Transfer news

>>  
>>                       * Premier League

>>  
>>                       * Manchester United

>>  
>>                       * Liverpool

>>  
>>                       * Arsenal

>>  
>>                       * Chelsea

>>  
>>                       * Tottenham Hotspur

>>  
>>                       * Manchester City

>>  
>>                       * West Ham

>>  
>>                       * Everton

>>  
>>                       * Celtic

>>  
>>                       * Rangers

>>  
>>                       * Tennis

>>  
>>                       * F1

>>  
>>                       * Rugby

>>  
>>                       * Boxing

>>  
>>                       * WWE

>>  
>>                       * UFC

>>  
>>                       * Golf

>>  
>>                       * NFL

>>  
>>                       * Cricket

>>  
>>                       * Racing

>>  
>>

>> ## Pictures

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Celebrity Galleries

>>  
>>                       * Royal Galleries

>>  
>>                       * Sport Galleries

>>  
>>

>> ## Comment

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Express Comment

>>  
>>                       * Columnists

>>  
>>

>> ## Finance

>>  
>>                 >>                       * City & Business

>>  
>>                       * Personal Finance

>>  
>>                       * The Crusader

>>  
>>

>> ## Travel

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Travel News

>>  
>>                       * Activity Holidays

>>  
>>                       * Beach Holidays

>>  
>>                       * Short & City breaks

>>  
>>                       * Cruise

>>  
>>

>> ## Entertainment

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Gaming

>>  
>>                       * Theatre

>>  
>>                       * Films

>>  
>>                       * Books

>>  
>>                       * Music

>>  
>>

>> ## Life & Style

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Life

>>  
>>                       * Style

>>  
>>                       * Health

>>  
>>                       * Cars

>>  
>>                       * Garden

>>  
>>                       * Property

>>  
>>                       * Food

>>  
>>                       * Tech

>>  
>>                       * Diets

>>  
>>

>> ## EXPRESS.CO.UK

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Apps

>>  
>>                       * Puzzles

>>  
>>                       * Horoscopes

>>  
>>                       * Discounts

>>  
>>                       * Shop

>>  
>>                       * Paper

>>  
>>                       * Sitemap

>>  
>>                       * Site Archive

>>  
>>                       * About Us

>>  
>>                       * Journalists

>>  
>>                       * How to Complain

>>  
>>                       * Report a Tech Issue

>>  
>>                       * Advertising

>>  
>>                       * Affiliate advertising

>>  
>>                       * Cookies Settings

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Cookie Policy

>>  
>>                       * Terms & Conditions

>>  
>>                       * Developed by Netro42

>>  
>>                       * Syndication and Licensing

>>  
>>                       * Clarifications and Corrections

>>  
>>

>> IPSO Regulated Copyright ©2019 Express Newspapers. "Daily Express" is a
registered trademark. All rights reserved.

>>

>>
![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/1068671835/?value=0&label=u9gYCOmHtQYQ28bK_QM&guid=ON&script=0)

>>

>> ![](https://analytics.twitter.com/i/adsct?txn_id=l4f18&p_id=Twitter)
![](//t.co/i/adsct?txn_id=l4f18&p_id=Twitter)

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

