
>

>> ![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1222207174458407&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * English

>>  
>>                       * 中文 (Chinese)

>>  
>>                       * Deutsch (German)

>>  
>>                       * Español (Spanish)

>>  
>>                       * Français (French)

>>  
>>                       * Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian)

>>  
>>                       * Italiano (Italian)

>>  
>>                       * 日本語 (Japanese)

>>  
>>                       * Português (Portuguese)

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * Rainforests

>>  
>>                       * Oceans

>>  
>>                       * Animals & Environment

>>  
>>                       * Solutions

>>  
>>                       * For Kids

>>  
>>                       * DONATE

>>  
>>                       * Impact

>>  
>>                       * More

>>  
>>                       * # Cretaceous sea levels were 550 feet higher than
today

>>  
>>

>> by Mongabay.com on 6 March 2008

>>

>> Cretaceous sea levels were 550 feet higher than today

>>

>> **Cretaceous sea levels were 550 feet higher than today

>>

>> mongabay.com

>>

>> March 6, 2008

>>

>> **

>>

>> Sea levels were 550 feet (170 m) higher in the late Cretaceous period,
about 80 million years ago, than today, shows a new reconstruction of historic
ocean basins published in the journal _Science_. The authors say the work may
help model current global warming-driven sea level change.

>>

>> | ![](https://photos.mongabay.com/08/0306sealevels.jpg)  
>  Figure 1 (top) illustrates the effect of a 170 m sea level rise on today 's
continents (dark blue), equivalent to the 170 m sea level maximum we model at
80 million years ago in the Cretaceous period. This is based on combined
changes in ocean basin volume and the melting of all present day ice sheets in
the hothouse climate that existed in the Cretaceous.

>>

>> Figure 2 (bottom) illustrates what the world may look like 80 million years
into the future, with sea level being 120 m lower than today (exposed land
shown in dark green). This is what we expect as the ocean basin volume will
continue increasing, as it has for the previous 80 million years, due to the
aging and deepening of the oceans. If, however, the current inland ice caps
partially or entirely melt, then this projected long-term sea level drop will
be alleviated by up to about 50 m. However, even in an ice-free world 80
million years into the future, we would see a net projected sea level drop of
about 70 meters. Image courtesy of R. Dietmar MÃ¼ller  
>  ---|---

>>

>> Analyzing data on ocean crust production, ocean sediment buildup and
tectonic plate boundaries to reconstruct ancient ocean basins, R. Dietmar
MÃ¼ller of the University of Sydney and colleagues modeled a late Cretaceous
sea level that was 550 feet (276-878 feet) [170 (85 to 270) meters] higher
than it is today. The estimates center around geological changes near New
Jersey, where plate movement might have pulled the Jersey coast downward by
340-585 feet (105 to 180 meters) in the past 70 million years. MÃ¼ller and
colleagues says the results "could help reconcile different Cretaceous sea
level estimates from the area" as well as improve forecasting for sea level
change due to warming climate.

>>

>> "A combination of a global ocean basin volume analysis with modern
geodynamic models provides a powerful tool for discriminating eustasy from
regional, time dependent sea-level variations caused by mantle convection. Our
global sea-level curve calibration provides an improved framework for sequence
stratigraphy, resource exploration, and models for long-term climate change,"
the authors write.

>>

>> The study suggests that the current rise attibuted to thermal expansion of
sea water and melting ice is but a brief interruption of an broader geological
trend toward deeper oceans. Overall the authors forecast a sea level decline
of 120 meters over the next 80 million years.

>>

>> R.D. Muller et al (2008). Long-Term Sea-Level Fluctuations Driven by Ocean
Basin Dynamics. Science 07 March 2008.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Article published by Rhett Butler

>>

>> Earth Science, Environment, Geology, Green, Impact Of Climate Change,
Oceans, Sea Levels

>>

>> Mongabay is a non-profit that depends on support from readers like you.
**Donate here.**

>>

>> ## Recent Posts

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://imgs.mongabay.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>>
content/uploads/sites/20/2019/06/06085128/indonesia_komodo_172618-100x100.jpg)

>>

>> Twice as many fishing vessels now, but it's harder to catch fish

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://imgs.mongabay.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/uploads/sites/20/2019/06/06104426/glass-eels-100x100.jpeg)

>>

>> Researchers and customs officials unite to fight wildlife trafficking using
eDNA

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://imgs.mongabay.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>>
content/uploads/sites/20/2019/05/29164546/12-20100815_449_SY_Hehy_web-100x100.jpg)

>>

>> The Great Insect Dying: Vanishing act in Europe and North America

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://imgs.mongabay.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/uploads/sites/20/2019/06/06054115/orchids5-100x100.png)

>>

>> You don’t find orchids; they find you’: Q&A with botanist Edicson Parra

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](https://imgs.mongabay.com/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/uploads/sites/20/2019/06/05130213/female-
ranger_1210px-100x100-1.jpg)

>>

>> Why more women should be included in the leadership of Virunga National
Park (commentary)

>>

>> ![](https://imgs.mongabay.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/12/20200135/MONGABAY-2017-magic-LOGO-version2.gif)

>>

>> ## Social channels

>>

>> ## Advertisement

>>

>> ![](https://imgs.mongabay.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/20/2018/11/23232752/AD_john_cannon_20150413-063800.jpg)

>>

>> View targeted feeds

>>  
>>                 >>                       * ## By topic

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ## By location

>>  
>>

>> Agriculture Animals Birds Climate Change Conservation Deforestation Energy
Featured Forests Happy-upbeat Environmental Herps Indigenous Peoples
Interviews Mammals New Species Oceans Palm Oil Rainforests Technology Wildlife
Many more topics

>>

>> Africa Amazon Asia Australia Borneo Brazil Cameroon Central America China
Colombia Congo India Indonesia Latin America Madagascar Malaysia New Guinea
Peru Sumatra United States Browse more locations

>>

>> ## Email Updates

>>

>> ![](https://imgs.mongabay.com/wp-

content/uploads/sites/20/2017/08/29211612/newsletterform_260x38px.jpg)

>>

>> ## Podcast

>>

>> ![](https://mongabay-images.s3.amazonaws.com/17/podcast_logo_new.jpg) | Our
biweekly podcast delivering news & inspiration from nature’s frontline.  
>  ---|---

>>

>> ## Quick updates

>>

>> Daily topic-based news alerts  
>

>>

>> ## Republish

>>

>> ![](https://mongabay-images.s3.amazonaws.com/17/repub_cc.jpg) | You may
republish Mongabay content in your publication at no cost.  
>  ---|---

>>

>> ![](https://imgs.mongabay.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/12134031/ocean-

lizard-donate-logo.jpg)

>>

>> ## Special series

>>

>> #### Endangered environmentalists

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Arson attack in Indonesia leaves
activist shaken

>>  
>>                       * For embattled environmental defenders, a reprieve
of sorts in

>>  
>>

>> 2018

>>  
>>                 >>                       * 7 convicted of killing Honduran
indigenous activist Berta

>>  
>>

>> Cáceres

>>

>> ![Endangered environmentalists](https://news.mongabay.com/wp-

content/themes/mongabay_v1/img/series/endangered-environmentalists.jpg)

>>

>> More articles

>>

>> #### Indonesias forest guardians

>>  
>>                 >>                       * On the island of Java, a social
forestry scheme creates jobs at

>>  
>>

>> home

>>  
>>                 >>                       * In Indonesia, bigger catches for
a fishing village protecting

>>  
>>

>> its mangroves

>>  
>>                 >>                       * In Bali, a village hews to
unwritten rules to manage its forest

>>  
>>

>> ![Indonesias forest guardians](https://news.mongabay.com/wp-

content/themes/mongabay_v1/img/series/indonesias-forest-guardians.jpg)

>>

>> More articles

>>

>> #### Conservation effectiveness

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Community buy-in stamps out
elephant poaching in Zambian park

>>  
>>                       * On a wing and a prayer? Evidence for ways to
conserve bats

>>  
>>

>> (commentary)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * New maps show where humans are
pushing species closer to

>>  
>>

>> extinction

>>

>> ![Conservation effectiveness](https://news.mongabay.com/wp-

content/themes/mongabay_v1/img/series/conservation-effectiveness.jpg)

>>

>> More articles

>>

>> #### Southeast asian infrastructure

>>  
>>                 >>                       * A forest beset by oil palms,
logging, now contends with a coal-

>>  
>>

>> trucking road

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Documentary on world’s rarest
ape generates film festival buzz

>>  
>>                       * In traffic-blighted Penang, transport upgrade plans
raise hopes

>>  
>>

>> and fears

>>

>> ![Southeast asian infrastructure](https://news.mongabay.com/wp-

content/themes/mongabay_v1/img/series/southeast-asian-infrastructure.jpg)

>>

>> More articles

>>

>> #### Amazon infrastructure

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Amazon fish kill at Sinop
spotlights risk from 80+ Tapajós basin

>>  
>>

>> dams

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Leading Amazon dam rights
activist, spouse and friend murdered

>>  
>>

>> in Brazil

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Madeira River dams may spell
doom for Amazon’s marathon catfish:

>>  
>>

>> Studies

>>

>> ![Amazon infrastructure](https://news.mongabay.com/wp-

content/themes/mongabay_v1/img/series/amazon-infrastructure.jpg)

>>

>> More articles

>>

>> #### Asian rhinos

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Rare rhino’s death should light
a fire under Indonesia

>>  
>>

>> (commentary)

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Vets rule out poaching and
disease in recent death of rare Javan

>>  
>>

>> rhino

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Last male rhino in Malaysia dies

>>  
>>

>> ![Asian rhinos](https://news.mongabay.com/wp-

content/themes/mongabay_v1/img/series/asian-rhinos.jpg)

>>

>> More articles

>>

>> #### Indonesian fisheries

>>  
>>                 >>                       * For artisanal fishers, fish
fences are an easy, but problematic,

>>  
>>

>> option

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Monitoring hack shines a light
on fishing boats operating under

>>  
>>

>> cover of dark

>>  
>>                 >>                       * In Indonesia, bigger catches for
a fishing village protecting

>>  
>>

>> its mangroves

>>

>> ![Indonesian fisheries](https://news.mongabay.com/wp-

content/themes/mongabay_v1/img/series/indonesian-fisheries.jpg)

>>

>> More articles

>>

>> #### Conservation in madagascar

>>  
>>                 >>                       * A Malagasy community races the
timber mafia to save its forest

>>  
>>                       * Conservationists call for lasting ban on trade in
Malagasy

>>  
>>

>> precious timber

>>  
>>                 >>                       * It’s now or never for
Madagascar’s biodiversity, experts say

>>  
>>

>> ![Conservation in madagascar](https://news.mongabay.com/wp-

content/themes/mongabay_v1/img/series/conservation-in-madagascar.jpg)

>>

>> More articles

>>

>> #### About Mongabay

>>

>> Mongabay is a U.S.-based non-profit conservation and environmental science
news platform. Our EIN or tax ID is 45-3714703.

>>

>> #### Information

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Mongabay.org

>>  
>>                       * Tropical Forest Network

>>  
>>                       * Wild Madagascar

>>  
>>                       * Selva Tropicales

>>  
>>                       * Mongabay Indonesia

>>  
>>                       * Mongabay India

>>  
>>                       * Tropical Conservation Science

>>  
>>

>> #### Social

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Twitter

>>  
>>                       * Instagram

>>  
>>                       * LinkedIn

>>  
>>                       * YouTube

>>  
>>

>> #### Information

>>  
>>                 >>                       * About Mongabay

>>  
>>                       * Copyright & Terms of Use

>>  
>>                       * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                       * Advertising

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>

>> © 2019 Copyright Conservation news

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

