
>

>> # ![](http://donellameadows.org/wp-

>>

>> content/themes/donellameadows/images/logo-2.png)

>>

>> Donate Now Academy for Systems Change

>>  
>>                 >>                       * About

>>  
>>                         * The Donella Meadows Project

>>  
>>                         * Academy for Systems Change

>>  
>>                         * Fellow Travelers

>>  
>>                         * Contact Us

>>  
>>                       * Works of Donella Meadows

>>  
>>                         * Dana's Writing

>>  
>>                         * Dana's Teaching

>>  
>>                           * Dana's Reading List

>>  
>>                         * Dana Meadows Must-Reads

>>  
>>                         * Kylie's Recommended Reading

>>  
>>                         * Video Resources

>>  
>>                         * Donella Meadows Collection at Dartmouth

>>  
>>                         * Wise Words from Dana

>>  
>>                         * Photos of Dana

>>  
>>                       * Resources

>>  
>>                         * Systems Thinking Book Sale

>>  
>>                         * Systems Thinking Resources

>>  
>>                         * Global Citizens Blog

>>  
>>                         * Last Call Documentary Screenings

>>  
>>                         * Climate Change Mitigation Tool

>>  
>>                         * Sustainable Economies Resources

>>  
>>                           * Vermont's New Economy

>>  
>>                             * 2015 New Economy Week

>>  
>>                             * New Economy Radio Commentaries

>>  
>>                         * Donella Meadows Leadership Fellows

>>  
>>

>> **Donella Meadows Archives**

>>

>> « A New Materials System Arises in Fits and Starts

>>

>> Dear Folks: April 29, 1990 »

>>

>> ## So is the Earth Warming or Isn't it?

>>

>> ![](http://donellameadows.org/wp-content/themes/donellameadows/images/ico-

facebook.gif) ![](http://donellameadows.org/wp-

content/themes/donellameadows/images/ico-twitter.gif)

>>

>> ### By Donella Meadows

>>

>> -April 26, 1990-

>>

>> With an aha! gotcha! flourish a skeptical reader sent me a recent news
release about global warming. "Scientists who analyzed 10 years of weather
satellite data found no evidence that the earth has warmed from the so-called
greenhouse effect," it said. "The northern hemisphere goes up slightly during
those 10 years and the southern hemisphere goes down slightly…. The data
cannot be used to say we've got an enhanced greenhouse effect."

>>

>> My correspondent fumed, "Why don't you recognize this in your weekly
diatribe?"

>>

>> I'm happy to recognize it, but in fairness I need to recognize all the
information the scientific community is putting forth to prove or disprove
that the planet is running a fever. It doesn't add up to an easy gotcha! for
either greenhouse alarmists or skeptics. It mainly shows how hard it is to
take the temperature of a planet.

>>

>> For instance:

>>

>> Temperature measurements made at the earth's surface show a slight cooling
from 1940 to 1965 and an increase since then, with a distinct rise in the
1980s. By these records the five hottest years of the past century were (in
increasing order) 1980, 1983, 1987, 1981, 1988. Looks like a greenhouse
effect, doesn't it?

>>

>> The trouble is, those measurements come from 2000 meteorological stations
not at all evenly distributed over the earth's surface (most are in the
northern hemisphere). Their number and position change over time. They could
be influenced by the local warming of urban heat islands. On the other hand
the satellite data quoted by my correspondent come from a series of changing
satellites, whose instruments are not so easily calibrated as instruments on
the ground. And they only cover 10 years, not nearly enough time to spot a
climate change.

>>

>> The best place to look for the greenhouse effect should be near the poles,
which are expected to warm much more than the equator. Sure enough, permafrost
in the Alaskan Arctic seems to be warming rapidly -- as much as five degrees
F. in last 50 or so years. Tree ring measurements of northern forests also
indicate warming.

>>

>> But Alaska is too small a sample of the Arctic to be significant. And tree
rings are affected by other things than temperature, such as moisture and acid
rain.

>>

>> Ice melting should be a clue to global warming. Sea ice off Antarctica
decreased alarmingly in 1970s. But then it began to bounce back in the 1980s.

>>

>> The greenhouse effect should warm the lower atmosphere but cool the high
stratosphere. That checks out -- there are clear measurements of stratospheric
cooling.

>>

>> A warmer ocean should expand and raise the sea level. Sea level is indeed
going up, but only at the rate it has been for a century or more. There is no
sign of the acceleration that would be expected from greenhouse warming.

>>

>> Just to complicate matters, scientists who monitor the varying output of
the sun say that since 1979 incoming solar energy has been on a slight
downturn -- the decrease has been just about exactly the amount that would
offset the predicted warming from greenhouse gases.

>>

>> With all this contradictory evidence, you might expect scientists to be
undecided about the greenhouse effect. Most of them aren't, however. A recent
poll (conducted by the journal Climatic Change) of 22 leading U.S. scientists
who study the earth's climate showed that 18 of the 22 believe strongly in the
ultimate reality of the greenhouse effect. Only two indicated disbelief.

>>

>> Are the scientists being unscientific? No, they are just looking at causes
as well as effects. Measurable warming is an effect, and a long-delayed one at
that. Its cause is the buildup of heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere. Those
gases are easily measured. There is no doubt whatsoever that they are
increasing -- because we release them when we burn fossil fuels, destroy
forests, and generate various kinds of air pollutants.

>>

>> Will the buildup of heat-trapping gases warm the planet? It might not, if
other cooling factors overwhelm it, or if there are self-correcting features
of the global climate system we don't understand. The warming might have
already started, but our ways of measuring might be too crude to detect it. It
might still be ahead of us, because of the thermal drag of the oceans. But its
cause is there. Rationally you'd have to say the effect is very likely.

>>

>> To hold up preventive action, waiting for an unmistakable measurement of
actual warming, is like smoking an increasing number of cigarettes, refusing
to stop until we can measure the lung cancer. By some lucky miracle we might
escape the cancer. It could already be there but not yet detectable. For sure,
by the time it's unmistakable, its treatment will be painful and perhaps too
late.

>>

>> Are ten years of satellite data enough to disprove the greenhouse effect?
No.

>>

>> Are the hot years of the 1980s enough to prove the greenhouse effect? No.

>>

>> Does that mean we should do nothing about the greenhouse effect? No.

>>

>> Copyright Sustainability Institute 1990

>>

>> ![Print Friendly, PDF &

Email](https://cdn.printfriendly.com/buttons/printfriendly-pdf-button.png)

>>

>> ### Archive Categories

>>  
>>                 >>                     * Articles & Papers

>>  
>>                     * Articles and Essays by Friends and Colleagues

>>  
>>                     * Bibliography

>>  
>>                     * Books

>>  
>>                     * Dear Folks Letters

>>  
>>                     * Global Citizen Columns

>>  
>>                     * Media

>>  
>>

>> ### Archive Tags

>>

>> advertising agriculture Balaton Bill Clinton chemicals children climate
change Cobb Hill community consumption corporations Dartmouth democracy
development economics economy election energy environment farming food
Foundation Farm George Bush global warming government Greenhouse Effect growth
In Context Limits to Growth media nature nuclear power oil pesticides politics
pollution population poverty science sheep sustainability taxes technology US
war

>>

>> ### Donella Meadows Legacy

>>  
>>                 >>                       *
![](http://donellameadows.org/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/themes/donellameadows/images/ico-text.gif)

>>

>> #### Publications

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Global Citizen Columns

>>  
>>                         * Dear Folks Letters

>>  
>>                         * Books

>>  
>>                         * Articles

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ![](http://donellameadows.org/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/themes/donellameadows/images/ico-hex.gif)

>>

>> #### Systems Thinking Resources

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Thinking in Systems

>>  
>>                         * Leverage Points

>>  
>>                         * Dancing With Systems

>>  
>>                         * Systems Thinking Resource List

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ![](http://donellameadows.org/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/themes/donellameadows/images/ico-media.gif)

>>

>> #### multimedia

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Video Resources

>>  
>>                         * Videos

>>  
>>                         * Photos of Dana

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                       * ![](http://donellameadows.org/wp-

>>  
>>

>> content/themes/donellameadows/images/ico-qoute-new.png)

>>

>> #### Quotations

>>  
>>                 >>                         * Tributes to Dana

>>  
>>                         * Favorite Dana Quotes

>>  
>>                         * Send Us Your Favorite Quote

>>  
>>

>> ### About The Donella Meadows Project

>>

>> ![](http://donellameadows.org/wp-

content/themes/donellameadows/images/img-5.gif)

>>

>> The mission of the Donella Meadows Project is to preserve Donella (Dana) H.
Meadows’s legacy as an inspiring leader, scholar, writer, and teacher; to
manage the intellectual property rights related to Dana’s published work; to
provide and maintain a comprehensive and easily accessible archive of her work
online, including articles, columns, and letters; to develop new resources and
programs that apply her ideas to current issues and make them available to an
ever-larger network of students, practitioners, and leaders in social change.
Read More

>>

>> ### Newsletter Sign Up

>>

>> The Academy occasionally sends E-newsletters with updates on the work of
our fellows, the Donella Meadows Project and more. Sign up here if you'd like
to stay connected.

>>

>> ## Subscribe to our mailing list

>>

>>           * indicates required

>>

>> Email Address *

>>

>> First Name

>>

>> Last Name

>>

>> **Select your interests below:**

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Workshops & Learning Hives

>>  
>>                       * Academy Fellows Program

>>  
>>                       * Multimedia Systems Change Fieldbook

>>  
>>                       * Donella Meadows Project

>>  
>>                       * Systems Change Stories

>>  
>>

>> ### Contact Form

>>

>> Your Name

>>

>> Your E-mail Address

>>

>> Your Message

>>

>> ![captcha](http://donellameadows.org/wp-

content/userfiles/wpcf7_captcha/1324830210.png) | -> |  
>  ---|---|---

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> #### About The Donella Meadows Project

>>  
>>                 >>                       * The Donella Meadows Project

>>  
>>                       * Academy for Systems Change, formerly Donella
Meadows Institute

>>  
>>                       * Fellow Travelers

>>  
>>                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>

>> #### Archives

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Tributes to Dana

>>  
>>                       * Bibliography

>>  
>>                       * Articles

>>  
>>                       * Global Citizen Columns

>>  
>>                       * Dear Folks Letters

>>  
>>                       * Books

>>  
>>                       * Media

>>  
>>                       * Articles & Essays by Colleagues

>>  
>>

>> #### Resources

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Systems Thinking Resources

>>  
>>                       * Global Citizens Blog

>>  
>>                       * Climate Change Mitigation Tool

>>  
>>                       * Donella Meadows Leadership Fellows Program

>>  
>>

>> #### Find Us On:

>>  
>>                 >>                       * Facebook

>>  
>>                       * Twitter

>>  
>>                       * LinkedIn

>>  
>>                       * Google+

>>  
>>                       * Vimeo

>>  
>>                       * RSS

>>  
>>

>> The Donella Meadows Project, a project of the Academy for Systems Change |
802-649-7250 | Contact Us

>>

>> The Academy for Systems Change site is a Catalyst Webworks production.  
>  Entries (RSS) and Comments (RSS). | (C) 1996-2019 The Academy for Systems
Change. All Rights Reserved.

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

