

This content does not have an English version.

This content does not have an Arabic version.

![Mayo

Clinic](https://www.mayoclinic.org/~/media/386AC346D62D46A4944E0923CAF00D28.svg)

Menu

Search

Search

  * Request an Appointment
  * Find a Doctor
  * Find a Job
  * Give Now

  * Log in to Patient Account

  * English

    * Español
    * Português
    * العربية
    * 中文
  * Twitter

  * Facebook
  * Pinterest
  * YouTube

  * Patient Care & Health Info

    * Patient Care & Health Info
    * Healthy Lifestyle
    * Symptoms A-Z
    * Diseases & Conditions A-Z
    * Tests & Procedures A-Z
    * Drugs & Supplements A-Z
    * Appointments
    * Patient & Visitor Guide
    * Billing & Insurance
    * Patient Online Services

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

patientcare.jpg) **Quality Care** _Find out why Mayo Clinic is the right place
for your health care._ Make an appointment.

  * Departments & Centers

    * Departments & Centers
    * Doctors & Medical Staff
    * Medical Departments & Centers
    * International Services
    * Research Centers & Programs
    * About Mayo Clinic
    * Contact Us

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-

docsdepts.jpg) **Meet the Staff** _Find a directory of doctors and departments
at all Mayo Clinic campuses._ Visit now.

  * Research

    * Research
    * Explore Research Labs
    * Find Clinical Trials
    * Research Faculty
    * Postdoctoral Fellowships
    * Discovery's Edge Magazine
    * Search Publications
    * Training Grant Programs

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-research.jpg)
**Research and Clinical Trials** _See how Mayo Clinic research and clinical
trials advance the science of medicine and improve patient care._ Explore now.

  * Education

    * Education
    * Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
    * Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
    * Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine
    * Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development
    * Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education
    * Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences
    * Alumni Center

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-meded.jpg)
**Visit Our Schools** _Educators at Mayo Clinic train tomorrow’s leaders to
deliver compassionate, high-value, safe patient care._ Choose a degree.

  * For Medical Professionals

    * For Medical Professionals
    * Provider Relations
    * Referring Physician Portal
    * AskMayoExpert
    * Video Center
    * Publications
    * Continuing Medical Education
    * Mayo Clinic Laboratories

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2013/05/02/10/56/globalnav-medprofs.jpg)
**Professional Services** _Explore Mayo Clinic's many resources and see jobs
available for medical professionals._ Get updates.

  * Products & Services

    * Products & Services
    * Health Books
    * Healthy Living Program
    * International Advisory Services
    * Sports Medicine
    * Licensable Content
    * Mayo Clinic Health Letter
    * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
    * Mayo Clinic Voice Apps
    * Medical Products and Stores
  * Giving to Mayo Clinic

    * Giving to Mayo Clinic
    * Give Now
    * Philanthropy in Action
    * Frequently Asked Questions
    * Contact Us to Give

![](/-/media/kcms/gbs/research/images/2018/04/25/20/54/globalnav-

transform-3col.jpg) **Philanthropy at Mayo Clinic** _Your support accelerates
powerful innovations in patient care, research and education._ Give today.

  * Request an Appointment
  * Find a Doctor
  * Find a Job
  * Give Now
  * Log in to Patient Account
  *     * Twitter
    * Facebook
    * Pinterest
    * YouTube

Request an Appointment

  * Patient Care & Health Information
  * Tests & Procedures

# Morning-after pill

  * Sections
  * About

Print

## Overview

  * ![Plan B One-Step morning-after pill](/-/media/kcms/gbs/patient-consumer/images/2013/08/26/10/37/my01190_im04402_mcdc7_planbpillphotothu_jpg.jpg)

### Plan B One-Step

### Plan B One-Step

Plan B One-Step is a type of morning-after pill that can be used after
unprotected sex to prevent pregnancy. Plan B One-Step contains the hormone
levonorgestrel -- a progestin -- which can prevent ovulation, block
fertilization or keep a fertilized egg from implanting in the uterus.

The morning-after pill is a type of emergency birth control (contraception).
Emergency contraception is used to prevent pregnancy for women who've had
unprotected sex or whose birth control method has failed.

The morning-after pill is intended for backup contraception only, not as a
primary method of birth control. Morning-after pills contain either
levonorgestrel (Plan B One-Step, Aftera, others) or ulipristal acetate (ella).

Levonorgestrel is available over-the-counter without a prescription;
ulipristal acetate is available only with a prescription.

## Why it's done

Morning-after pills can help prevent pregnancy if you've had unprotected sex
-- either because you didn't use birth control, you missed a birth control
pill, you were sexually assaulted or your method of birth control failed.

Morning-after pills do not end a pregnancy that has implanted. They work
primarily by delaying or preventing ovulation.

Keep in mind that the morning-after pill isn't the same as mifepristone
(Mifeprex), also known as RU-486 or the abortion pill. This drug terminates an
established pregnancy -- one in which the fertilized egg has attached to the
uterine wall and has begun to develop.

Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic

## Risks

Emergency contraception is an effective option for preventing pregnancy after
unprotected sex, but it isn't as effective as other methods of contraception
and isn't recommended for routine use. Also, the morning-after pill can fail
even with correct use, and it offers no protection against sexually
transmitted infections.

The morning-after pill isn't appropriate for everyone. Don't take a morning-
after pill if:

  * You're allergic to any component of the morning-after pill
  * You're taking certain medications that can decrease the effectiveness of the morning-after pill, such as barbiturates or St. John's wort

If you're overweight or obese, there's some indication that the morning-after
pill won't be as effective in preventing pregnancy as it is for women who
aren't overweight.

Also, make sure you're not pregnant before using ulipristal. The effects of
ulipristal on a developing baby are unknown. If you're breast-feeding,
ulipristal isn't recommended.

Side effects of the morning-after pill, which typically last only a few days,
might include:

  * Nausea or vomiting
  * Dizziness
  * Fatigue
  * Headache
  * Breast tenderness
  * Bleeding between periods or heavier menstrual bleeding
  * Lower abdominal pain or cramps

## How you prepare

For maximum effectiveness, emergency contraception should be started as soon
as possible after unprotected intercourse, and within 120 hours. You can take
emergency contraceptive pills anytime during your menstrual cycle.

## What you can expect

To use the morning-after pill:

  * Follow the morning-after pill's instructions. If you use Plan B One-Step, take one Plan B One-Step pill as soon as possible and less than 72 hours after unprotected sex. If you use ella, take one ella pill as soon as possible and less than 120 hours after unprotected sex.
  * If you vomit within two hours after taking the morning-after pill, ask your health care provider if you should take another dose.
  * Don't have sex until you start another method of birth control. The morning-after pill doesn't offer lasting protection from pregnancy. If you have unprotected sex in the days and weeks after taking the morning-after pill, you're at risk of becoming pregnant. Be sure to begin using or resume use of birth control.

Using the morning-after pill may delay your period by up to one week. If you
don't get your period within three to four weeks of taking the morning-after
pill, take a pregnancy test.

Normally, you don't need to contact your health care provider after using the
morning-after pill. However, if you have bleeding or spotting that lasts
longer than a week or develop severe lower abdominal pain three to five weeks
after taking the morning-after pill, contact him or her. These can indicate a
miscarriage or that the fertilized egg has implanted outside the uterus,
usually in a fallopian tube (ectopic pregnancy).

By Mayo Clinic Staff

Request an Appointment at Mayo Clinic

June 08, 2018

Print

Share on: FacebookTwitter

References

  1. Kaunitz AM. Emergency contraception. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed March 29, 2018.
  2. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) Committee on Practice Bulletins -- Obstetrics. ACOG Practice Bulletin #152: Emergency contraception. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2015;126:e1.
  3. Frequently asked questions. Contraception FAQ114. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. https://www.acog.org/Patients/FAQs/Emergency-Contraception. Accessed March, 29, 2018.
  4. Emergency contraception. The National Women's Health Information Center. https://www.womenshealth.gov/a-z-topics/emergency-contraception. Accessed March 29, 2018.
  5. Ella (prescribing information). Parsippany, N.J.: Watson Pharma Inc.; 2014. http://pi.watson.com/data_stream.asp?product_group=1699&p=pi&language=E. Accessed March 29, 2018.

## Morning-after pill

  * About

## Advertisement

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue
supports our not-for-profit mission.

**Advertising & Sponsorship**

  * Policy
  * Opportunities
  * Ad Choices

### Mayo Clinic Marketplace

Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from
Mayo Clinic.

  * Live stronger, longer and healthier
  * 4 simple steps to a joy-filled life
  * Mayo Clinic on Arthritis
  * Stop osteoporosis in its tracks
  * The Mayo Clinic Diet

PRC-20394718

  * Patient Care & Health Information
  * Tests & Procedures
  * Morning-after pill

![Mayo Clinic](/styles/img/logo-mayoclinic.png)

  * Request Appointment
  * Contact Us
  * About Mayo Clinic
  * Employees
  * Find a Job
  * Site Map
  * About This Site

  * Twitter

  * Facebook
  * Pinterest
  * YouTube

Mayo Clinic is a not-for-profit organization. Make a donation.

## Patient Care & Health Info

  * Healthy Lifestyle
  * Symptoms A-Z
  * Diseases & Conditions A-Z
  * Tests & Procedures A-Z
  * Drugs & Supplements A-Z
  * Appointments
  * Patient & Visitor Guide
  * Billing & Insurance
  * Patient Online Services

## Departments & Centers

  * Doctors & Medical Staff
  * Medical Departments & Centers
  * International Services
  * Research Centers & Programs
  * About Mayo Clinic
  * Contact Us

## Research

  * Explore Research Labs
  * Find Clinical Trials
  * Research Faculty
  * Postdoctoral Fellowships
  * Discovery's Edge Magazine
  * Search Publications
  * Training Grant Programs

## Education

  * Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
  * Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences
  * Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine
  * Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional Development
  * Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education
  * Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences
  * Alumni Center

## For Medical Professionals

  * Provider Relations
  * Referring Physician Portal
  * AskMayoExpert
  * Video Center
  * Publications
  * Continuing Medical Education
  * Mayo Clinic Laboratories

## Products & Services

  * Health Books
  * Healthy Living Program
  * International Advisory Services
  * Sports Medicine
  * Licensable Content
  * Mayo Clinic Health Letter
  * Mayo Clinic Laboratories
  * Mayo Clinic Voice Apps
  * Medical Products and Stores

Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions
and Privacy Policy linked below.

  * Terms and Conditions
  * **Privacy Policy**
  * **Notice of Privacy Practices**
  * Notice of Nondiscrimination
  * Manage Cookies

A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal
use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy
Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo
Foundation for Medical Education and Research.

![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to

verify.](https://www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct636199_hr1.gif) This
site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information:  
verify here.

© 1998-2019 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All
rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

