

Skip to main content

  *     * __Share on Facebook
    * __Share on Twitter
    * __Email
    * __Print
    * __Comments
  *     * Donate
  * Donate
  * Subscribe

  * __

  * Bernie Sanders
  * Right-Wing Disinfo Campaign
  * Abortion Access

  * Politics

  * Environment
  * Crime and Justice
  * Food
  * Media
  * Investigations
  * Photos
  * Magazine
  * Podcasts
  * Newsletters

AdvertisementClose X

  * __
  * Bernie Sanders
  * Right-Wing Disinfo Campaign
  * Abortion Access

Subscribe to our magazine

Donate

Smart, Fearless Journalism

  * Politics
  * Environment
  * Crime and Justice
  * Food
  * Media
  * Investigations
  * Photos
  * Magazine
  * Podcasts
  * * * *

## Kevin Drum message

![Kevin Drum photo](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/Drum_bio_gradient_900.jpg?w=200)![Kevin Drum

photo](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/Drum_bio_gradient_900.jpg?w=200)

Dear reader,

"There's a New Kind of Corruption in Town:" That's my post where I talk about
the new types of corruption that more and more seem to define us, and ask
readers to help crowdfund the new _Mother Jones_ Corruption Project. My take?
Corruption is nothing new, but today feels different, and a big reason why is
the growing dismissal of the media that once exposed My Lai, the Rambler, Bull
Connor and Watergate. Please check out the full post, and pitch in with a tax-
deductible donation if our plan sounds good to you.

![](https://practice.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/drum_signature.png)![](https://practice.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/06/drum_signature.png)

Kevin Drum, _Mother Jones_ Donate

"There's a New Kind of Corruption in Town:" Kevin Drum makes the case to pitch
in for _MoJo_ 's new Corruption Project.

Donate

# Inside the Top-Secret Abortion Underground

### Code names, top-secret training, and a movement of women determined to

avoid the medical establishment.

Nina Liss-SchultzMarch/April 2018 Issue

![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/432_underground_title_2000x1124.jpg?w=2000&h=1124&crop=1)

Chloe Aftel

  * __Share on Facebook
  * __Share on Twitter
  * __Email
  * __Print
  * __Comments

On a summer day in 2015, Renata and more than a dozen women, all strangers
from different parts of the country, sat in a semicircle on the living-room
floor of a house, deep in the rural South. A lean twentysomething with a wide
smile and olive skin, Renata was the only nonwhite person in the group. And
she felt conspicuous in other ways too—many of the women struck her as kind of
"new agey," and some had been involved in a "crystal energetics" midwifery
program. All of them had big red binders full of worksheets and documents
related to the topic at hand: how to help women self-induce an abortion. "My
initial thought," she recalls, "is, 'What the fuck did I get myself into?'"

Renata had come from Arizona to attend the weeklong training. She learned how,
in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, white male doctors consolidated
their professional power in part by sidelining female and often nonwhite
midwives and other community healers. She learned which drugs and herbs induce
a miscarriage and where to buy the small, plastic, strawlike instrument that
is inserted into the uterus and suctions out an unwanted pregnancy. If
problems arise, what should one say to avoid scrutiny at the emergency room?
In which states is self-induced abortion, and helping women self-induce, a
crime?

On the second day, the group split into pairs, and in different rooms they
practiced pelvic exams. Renata (whose name, along with those of other
providers and clients in this story, has been changed) and her partner,
propped up by pillows, tried not to pinch each other with the plastic speculum
they were still learning to use. "It was emotional," she remembers. "It's a
heavy topic, and you're working with each other's bodies." The next day, a
member of the group demonstrated on a woman having her period how a manual
vacuum aspiration device, a handheld plastic syringe used by clinics for
first-trimester abortions, could pull out the menses—or a pregnancy.

"We all deserve the right to choose how, where, and with whom we want to have
our abortions."

As long as women have had unwanted pregnancies, other women have helped them
resolve the problem. After the mid-19th century, when abortion was outlawed,
women either found a physician who did it on the sly or turned to traditional
helpers, a practice that continued even after the Supreme Court legalized
abortion in 1973. Today, as abortion rights are restricted at an unprecedented
rate—between 2011 and 2016, more than 160 clinics closed—this informal network
of nonmedical providers is responsible for a small but significant number of
abortions nationwide.

Renata is part of a growing underground movement of people across America who
have taught themselves to help women terminate pregnancies without a doctor. I
talked to dozens of these clandestine providers, and our conversations offer a
rare glimpse into a world that is shrouded in secrecy and fear. Some urged me
not to write about their work. But their efforts reveal a new aspect of how
the war on reproductive rights has played out, and how a new generation of
activists has come to believe that it's reasonable to handle this aspect of
women's health care outside a medical setting. And they are determined to give
more women that opportunity, no matter the legal risk.

In the nearly three years since her training, Renata has helped about 20 women
have abortions in Arizona, a state extremely hostile to abortion rights. She
says she knows as many as 75 people, some of whom are queer or gender-
nonconforming, who either provide these services or train others. For a 2016
study, University of Washington researcher Alison Ojanen-Goldsmith asked 19
people doing home abortions to count everyone they knew who had used
alternative abortion methods. All told, the group identified 843 people, some
of whom were also providers. Of those identified as providers, the study
participants estimated that each person was involved in anywhere between 10
and 100 home abortions. "That's huge," Ojanen-Goldsmith says. "There are
potentially thousands of these abortions happening every year."

Having or even soliciting a self-induced abortion, however, is illegal in
Arizona and six other states—Delaware, Idaho, Nevada, New York, Oklahoma, and
South Carolina. Even in states without an outright ban, underground providers
operate in, at best, a legal gray area. The Self-Induced Abortion Legal Team,
which since 2015 has conducted research on self-induced abortion and the law,
has identified about 40 types of legislation that could potentially be used to
prosecute those who self-induce or help others do so. They range from murder
and child endangerment to less obvious offenses, like failing to report a
birth or improperly disposing of human remains. Because of the strong taboo
against abortions, says SIA lawyer Farah Diaz-Tello, prosecutors may be more
inclined to seek the harshest possible charges. And even outside the law, the
work has plenty of critics, among them some abortion rights advocates who say
this practice is medically or legally risky.

Some providers of clandestine abortions say that ending a pregnancy outside a
clinic is akin to other forms of alternative health care like herbal therapies
or home birth. And they believe the procedure represents a way for women to
better understand their own bodies, especially their wombs, which are regarded
with reverence. They see their work as a necessary effort to expand options
for safe abortions. Many of their clients _could_ go to a clinic but would
rather terminate pregnancies on their own terms. As one secretive online
resource for underground providers puts it, "Clinical abortion care plays a
vital role," but "we all deserve the right to choose how, where, and with whom
we want to have our abortions."

The familiar narrative of abortion access in America goes something like this:
Back when the practice was illegal, women struggling with unwanted pregnancies
sought out quack doctors for help, in some cases ending up blindfolded on
strangers' kitchen tables. By the mid-1960s, when between 200,000 and 1.2
million illegal abortions were performed each year, about 200 deaths from
botched abortions were reported annually. Hospital wards were created
specifically for women who developed infections or started hemorrhaging after
trying to do it themselves. Then came the 1973 _Roe v. Wade_ Supreme Court
decision. Clinics with professional doctors sprang up to help women end their
pregnancies safely. Abortion foes, led in part by Catholics, Moral Majority
leaders, and conservative legislators, organized to fight "abortion on
demand." After the tea party's 2010 victories in Congress and state
legislatures, hundreds of new restrictions were passed in short order, forcing
clinics to close and, researchers suspect, increasingly driving abortions
underground.

![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/432_012918_underground_630.jpg)![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/432_012918_underground_630.jpg)

Even pro-choice physicians stop short of endorsing underground providers,
arguing that someone with inadequate training may not recognize complications.

Chloe Aftel

That story is true enough. But what's also true is that for generations women
have ended their pregnancies, successfully and without consequence, on their
own or with the help of friends. In the early 1800s, when abortion was only
illegal after the point of "quickening," or discernible fetal movement (at
roughly 16 to 20 weeks), women consulted medical guides with names like
_Domestic Medicine_ and _The_ _Female Medical Repository_ that described
techniques for "unblocking obstructed menses," such as quinine concoctions or
cocktails of juniper and bitter apple. Herbalists and midwives offered teas
made from the black cohosh root, a practice still in use today.

Later in the century, the newly formed American Medical Association
spearheaded efforts to criminalize abortion, which historians believe was part
of a larger campaign to monopolize the market and restrict competition,
including from midwives. Physicians, almost exclusively men, publicly
questioned the morality of abortion—and by extension the morality of the lay
practitioners who provided it. Horatio Storer, a Harvard-educated "father of
gynecology" and chairman of an anti-abortion AMA committee, wrote in an 1860s
text that Anglo-Saxon American women should reject abortion to preserve
cultural dominance. "Shall [America] be filled by our own children or by those
of aliens?" Storer wrote. "This is a question that our own women must answer;
upon their loins depends the future destiny of the nation." Still, abortion
continued in the shadows. By the time the women's liberation movement demanded
a public reckoning with the private oppressions women faced, access to
abortion had once again become a concern.

In the early 1960s, Carol Downer was a typist with four children at home and a
marriage on the rocks. When she got pregnant a fifth time, she found someone
who she thought was a doctor who agreed to give her an illegal abortion. He
left wads of gauze in her uterus and a thin strip dangling from her cervix; in
a later conversation, he said she could finally remove it. The material,
hardened and dried with blood, felt like a sharp razor passing through her
body, Downer, now 84 years old, told me. The experience radicalized her.

She joined the Los Angeles chapter of the National Organization for Women and,
through a member of the group, met Harvey Karman, an abortionist whom she
began shadowing. The first time Downer saw a cervix, she says, "I had an
epiphany. It was just crystal clear the key role that ignorance of our bodies
played in this whole situation." If women understood their bodies and what the
procedure involved, she reasoned, "we wouldn't be sticking knitting needles
into our uteruses and dying—or using douches of lye."

Karman was pioneering a new way to perform abortions. Instead of scraping the
lining of the uterus with a tool called a curette, a painful and invasive
procedure, he used suction to remove the pregnancy. Downer and a friend
believed this could revolutionize women's ability to abort independently,
eventually leading to the exclusion of intermediaries, like Karman, in the
process. The biggest hurdle was the pelvic exam, which they practiced while
using the suction technique to remove each other's menses.

In 1971, after California, unlike most states, had liberalized its abortion
laws, Downer's group placed a notice in a Los Angeles newspaper announcing a
meeting about reproductive health that was in fact intended to discuss
Karman's suction technique. Thirty women showed up at a bookstore in Venice
Beach, but when Downer described freeing women to do abortions on their own,
the crowd grew quiet. Sensing their worry, Downer lifted her skirt and hopped
onto a desk, using a speculum and mirror to show the others how easy pelvic
exams were to perform. "People were so happy, so interested," she remembers.
"They wanted to be a part of it." The women began meeting weekly, and one of
them figured out how to simplify Karman's device with everyday materials
including a mason jar, aquarium tubing, forceps, and a syringe to create
suction.

Abortions were important, but the women also learned how to do pelvic self-
exams and understand the biology of ovulation. Before long, Downer and another
friend embarked on a tour to spread their self-help gospel to groups across
the country. In California, hospitals had begun offering limited abortion
services, and Downer's group referred pregnant women to a physician at one of
them while teaching self-help on other topics like natural contraception. But
she also witnessed as many as 100 menstrual-extraction abortions outside
clinical settings.

![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/20180215underground960.jpg)![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/20180215underground960.jpg)

The implements used in a clandestine abortion

Chloe Aftel

Similar efforts were taking place all over the country. In Chicago, an
organization of self-trained women called Jane offered abortions in the four
years before _Roe_ , ultimately terminating upward of 11,000 pregnancies,
according to a book written by medical historian Leslie Reagan. A network of
pastors and other religious officials created a nationwide referral service to
connect women with safe, if illegal, abortion doctors. Outside the underground
networks, feminist groups were pushing for better education about how women's
bodies work and a health care system that was more responsive to their needs,
culminating in the 1973 publication of _Our Bodies, Ourselves_ , a
groundbreaking manual exploring all aspects of women's health.

Within weeks of abortion becoming legal nationally, Downer opened a women-run
clinic that offered instruction in self-help but where licensed physicians
performed abortions. Years later, thanks to some of the tools her group
pioneered, suction became standard practice for first-trimester abortions. But
her greatest legacy may be her role in reviving the community health care
traditions in which women helped other women. "We hearkened to the message
that women need to take back our health care," Downer says, to "regain female
knowledge" of reproduction.

Sitting across from me on a bench in the secluded corner of a coffee shop in
Arizona, Renata, who grew up in California's Central Valley with Mexican
immigrant parents, describes her work with clients. Typically with no other
options, always referred by word-of-mouth, they call her by a code name that
she didn't want to share with me. Establishing trust works both ways; Renata
vets them thoroughly, since she must be sure they won't turn her in to law
enforcement. She explains worst-case scenarios, backup plans, and, should
complications arise, the necessity of telling an emergency room physician that
they might be having a miscarriage. For most of her clients, their income
level and immigration status make health insurance impossible and hospitals
and clinics intimidating. (Renata charges clients on a sliding scale and often
collects about $25, which means she's typically losing money.) "It's hard
enough to set foot in a school, let alone a hyperformal clinic," she says.
Even though many clinics also charge on a sliding scale, her clients are often
fearful of leaving "a paper trail," not having an ID, or encountering language
barriers. All they want is a safe and effective way to end their pregnancies.

Usually, Renata gives them misoprostol, one of two drugs for what is known as
a medication abortion. In clinics doctors tell patients to take mifepristone
first, to end the pregnancy, and then misoprostol to expel it from the body.
But in the 1980s, women in Latin America realized that misoprostol, otherwise
known as miso, was effective on its own. Even more appealing, miso is cheap
and widely available, since it's also used as an anti-ulcer drug. A friend
with a medical license sends Renata the drugs and she gives them to her
clients, often supplemented by a regimen of herbs. She sits with them during
the abortion, which can take a full day, and follows up regularly once it's
done. After the procedure, Renata destroys all the client's records.

Over the last decade, Arizona has passed extremely restrictive abortion
legislation. One doctor says the number of patients asking about self-induced
abortion has skyrocketed.

It's unclear exactly how many people have been prosecuted for helping someone
end a pregnancy. Before abortion was legalized, police raided two apartments
where the Janes worked in 1972. Three women waiting for abortions were taken
to the hospital, and seven Janes were arrested, including a high school
English teacher, several stay-at-home mothers, and a student. One of the
providers swallowed a list of patients' names she carried in her purse. All
seven were referred to a grand jury for indictment, but the case was dismissed
when the Supreme Court legalized abortion. That same year, police raided
Downer's self-help clinic in Los Angeles after someone reported that she had
treated a yeast infection by inserting yogurt into a woman's vagina. She was
arrested and charged with practicing medicine without a license, which she
beat by arguing that her home remedy was not, in fact, medicine.

More recently, women who weren't affiliated with the at-home abortion movement
have been prosecuted. In 2012, Jennifer Whalen, a 36-year-old mother of three
in rural Pennsylvania, where about 85 percent of counties are without an
abortion clinic, ordered abortion drugs online for her 16-year-old daughter.
The closest abortion clinic was 75 miles away, and the procedure would cost up
to $600. After taking the drugs, her daughter got scared, so they drove to the
ER, where staff reported Whalen to child protective services. Her daughter was
fine, but nearly two years later Whalen was charged with a felony for offering
a medical consultation without a license, and with three misdemeanors:
endangering the welfare of a child, dispensing drugs without being a
pharmacist, and assault. She pleaded guilty to the felony and one misdemeanor
and was sentenced to 9 to 18 months in jail. In 2015, an Arkansas nurse gave
drugs to a friend who ended her pregnancy at home before going to the
emergency room, according to an incident report. Her friend was reported to
law enforcement and later was convicted of concealing a birth; the nurse
ultimately pleaded guilty to unlawful abortion.

![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/432_underground_e_960.jpg)![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/432_underground_e_960.jpg)

Since 2015, Renata, a clandestine provider in Arizona, has helped about 20
people end their pregnancies.

Chloe Aftel

Renata and the other providers I interviewed are terrified they could end up
in the same predicament. One woman, based in a Western state, who has helped
about 150 women—many of them sex workers—end their pregnancies said she
constantly rotates through burner phones to stay under the radar. When I asked
her how she stays safe, she replied half-jokingly, "My partner has a lot of
guns." She wrote to me shortly after her second child was born: "I know that I
am putting myself and my family at risk for being without me if I am
prosecuted or worse. I do this work to help people who need it." In
California, I spoke to Ruth, another provider who started performing at-home
abortions after finding the clinic experience to be too sterile and isolating.
"Staying at home, choosing who is with them and who is not, gives people
autonomy," Ruth said.

But doctors are skeptical that self-induced abortion is a safe option. I
talked with a Planned Parenthood abortion physician—one of just a handful in
Arizona—who asked to remain anonymous to protect his identity and his family's
safety. He's not surprised more women aren't making it to his clinic these
days. Over the last decade, Arizona has passed extremely restrictive abortion
legislation. One law stipulates that surgical abortion can only be performed
by a physician; a second law forbids physician assistants from dispensing
abortion drugs. In 2008, there were 10 Planned Parenthood clinics that
provided abortion services. Now, there are only four. Plus, patients face
mandatory waiting periods and parental consent laws.

The state has also passed strict regulations of abortion by medication. In
March 2016, new guidelines from the Food and Drug Administration recommended
that mifepristone could be used until the 10th week of pregnancy and at lower
doses than previously thought. But a day later, Republican Gov. Doug Ducey
signed a bill requiring Arizona doctors to use the outdated protocol, forcing
women to undergo a less effective regimen with more side effects. (That
measure was subsequently repealed.) The state has banned physicians from
prescribing abortion drugs by phone, so women may have to drive hours for an
initial mandatory counseling appointment before sitting out a required 24-hour
waiting period and returning for their prescription.

![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/201705fetalhomicide290.jpg?w=290)![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/201705fetalhomicide290.jpg?w=290)

RELATED: She Was Desperate. She Tried to End Her Own Pregnancy. She Was Thrown
in Jail.

The Arizona doctor says that over the last two years, the number of patients
who have asked him about self-induced abortion has skyrocketed. He regularly
Googles "self-induced abortion," so he has some sense of what his clients
might be seeing, but he is ultimately skeptical about its safety for every
patient. Women come to him with complications. "I ask myself, 'Is this
something I'd want my daughter to do?' And the answer is no. But the reality
is I can understand."

Daniel Grossman, a prominent abortion rights expert and a professor of
obstetrics and gynecology at the University of California-San Francisco, notes
that research does support some methods of self-induced abortion. "I don't
believe self-induced abortion is necessarily unsafe," he says when I reach him
by phone. He adds that women can "very safely" take misoprostol on their own.
But as a physician, he can't ethically recommend that they use menstrual
extraction kits and other such devices to end their pregnancies. There's a
risk of uterine perforation and hemorrhaging, which can be deadly. The safety
of these methods depends on the provider, he says, and someone with inadequate
training may not know when there's a complication. As for the herbs, which are
believed to flush out the contents of the uterus, like miso does, Grossman
says their safety and efficacy haven't been proved.

Even Heather Booth, the founding member of Jane who ran an underground
abortion service out of her dorm room at the University of Chicago and
describes her cause as a righteous "good deed," stopped short of saying she
approved of what Renata and her colleagues are doing. When I asked if she
still saw a need for underground abortion, she demurred. "I think we need to
do everything possible to make [abortion] available to all and ensure that the
services are available for all."

All the underground providers I spoke with rejected the notion that the care
they provide is unsafe. Many harbor a deep dislike of the medical
establishment and are convinced their work will always be criticized because
doctors see out-of-clinic care as a threat to their monopoly. As with Downer
and the 19th-century midwives, they seek to provide a different type of care
entirely.

"Is this something I'd want my daughter to do? The answer is no. But the
reality is I can understand."

As part of her study, Ojanen-Goldsmith asked participants who had previously
self-induced, some of whom were also providers, why they did it. Nearly two-
thirds had had at least one clinical termination prior to their self-induced
abortion, and more than half had worked or volunteered in traditional
settings. They self-induced either to avoid a clinic—perhaps because of an
onerous restriction or affordability—or because they wanted something like an
herbal regimen, a spiritual ceremony, or the comfort of their own homes. Diaz-
Tello notes, "It's not all out of desperation."

Renata knows this all too well. She recently helped a transgender man, a
citizen who could have afforded Planned Parenthood but didn't feel comfortable
there, end his unwanted pregnancy. As for safety concerns, she points out that
she always discusses them with her clients but adds that no one has ever been
deterred. "They know they have no other options," she says. "People are
fucking terrified of continuing their pregnancies."

On a blazing hot summer day last year, Renata shows me into the two-bedroom
red-brick house she shares with her boyfriend. A pit bull greets us, and
sitting on an entryway table is a speculum decorated with rhinestones and
feathers. They had recently moved into the house from a smaller one-bedroom
apartment so that Renata could see clients in the extra room.

Renata's sister is her only family member who knows what she does. She is
alone in her shadowy work, and in more ways than one—she has met just a
handful of providers of color on the job and worries that, because most of the
underground providers she knows are white, women of color who need help ending
a pregnancy might hesitate before contacting them. She hopes more Spanish
speakers and people of color will get trained to provide at-home abortions,
but until then, she'll do what she can. "You create a system when the need is
high enough."

One of her clients is Sofia, a botanist in her 20s who was seven weeks
pregnant when Renata gave her misoprostol last October. Someday, Sofia plans
to have children with her current partner, but this pregnancy came as a shock.
She had immigrated to the United States from Mexico as a small child and was
undocumented until recently. She decided she just couldn't afford a baby. "I
want to make sure that I'm at a better place in terms of finances when I do
have a child," she says softly over the phone.

Her experience as an undocumented immigrant—living most of her life under the
radar and without health insurance—and her traumatizing memories of navigating
a hospital system unsympathetic to Spanish speakers, plus the expense, made
her wary of what she might face in a clinic. So, she found Renata. "I knew
that if I was going to do this, I had the choice and the option of doing it at
home," she tells me before breaking into tears. "I haven't told people in my
homeland. It's stigmatized. There was never the option to have an abortion."
With the help of herbs and miso, Sofia successfully ended her pregnancy.

"Renata is a role model in the way she supported me through this," Sofia says.
"It takes a special kind of person to do this work, especially to do this
underground, without people knowing much."

_This article has been updated._

### Looking for news you can trust?

Subscribe to our free newsletters.

### THE MOTHER JONES CORRUPTION PROJECT

The more we thought about how our journalism can have the most impact heading
into the 2020 election, the more we realized that so many of today's stories
come down to corruption: **democracy and the rule of law being undermined by
the wealthy and powerful for their own gain**.

So we're launching a new _Mother Jones_ Corruption Project to do deep, time-
intensive reporting on systemic corruption. **We aim to hire, build a team,
and give them the time and space needed to understand how we got here and how
we might get out**. We'll publish what we find as a major series in the summer
of 2020, including a special issue of our magazine, a dedicated online portal,
and video and podcast series so it doesn't get lost in the daily deluge of
breaking news.

It's unlike anything we've done before and we've got seed funding to get
started, but we're asking readers to help crowdfund this new beat with an
additional $500,000 so we can go even bigger. You can read why we're taking
this approach and what we want to accomplish in "Corruption Isn't Just Another
Scandal. It's the Rot Beneath All of Them," and if you like how it sounds,
please help fund it with a tax-deductible donation today.

Donate Now

## Related

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/20171129_hawaii-access.jpg?w=990)

### Abortion Access Is a Myth For Rural Women in Hawaii

Maha Ahmed

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/feticide_a-2000x1124_3.jpg?w=990)

### She Was Desperate. She Tried to End Her Own Pregnancy. She Was Thrown in

Jail

Nina Liss-Schultz

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Screen-Shot-2019-06-04-at-2.23.22-PM.png?w=593)

### Alabama Banned Abortions. Then Its Lawmakers Remembered Rapists Can Get

Parental Rights.

Samantha Michaels

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/newhampshirerepeal-53019.jpg?w=990)

### New Hampshire Lawmakers Just Overrode the Republican Governor’s Veto and

Abolished the Death Penalty

Nathalie Baptiste

## We Recommend

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/inslee-060619.jpg?w=990)

### Jay Inslee Says He May Defy the DNC on a Climate Change Debate

Rebecca Leber

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/AP_19152576024147-1.jpg?w=990)

### After a Mass Shooting, Virginia Is Rethinking Its Gun Laws—and Rewiring

the 2020 Race

Kara Voght

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/20190430_zap_c210_036.jpeg?w=990)

### The Suspicious Twitter Network Trolling for Regime Change in Iran

Ali Breland

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/GettyImages-1074739622.jpg?w=990)

### How Lobbyists Are Cashing In on Trump's Chaotic Libya Policy

Dan Friedman

## Recent

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/20190606-trump-d-day.png?w=981)

### On the 75th Anniversary of D-Day, Trump Obsesses Over Media Coverage

Inae Oh

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/GettyImages-1150781658.jpg?w=990)

### Controversial State Department Program Backing Trump's Iran Policy Draws

Congressional Scrutiny

Dan Friedman

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/AP060519ross.jpg?w=990)

### Judge Deals a Blow to Effort to Block Census Citizenship Question at

Supreme Court

Ari Berman

  * ![](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/donald-trump.jpg?w=990)

### Donald Trump Said Really Stupid Things About Climate Today. Here Are 8

Facts He Ignored.

Fiona Harvey

### Sign up for our newsletters

_Subscribe and we'll send_ Mother Jones _straight to your inbox._

### Get our award-winning magazine

_Save big on a full year of investigations, ideas, and insights._

Subscribe

### Support our journalism

_Help_ Mother Jones _' reporters dig deep with a tax-deductible donation._

Donate

**Coming soon:** We’re going to introduce some major changes to the comments
section. And we want your feedback.

__view comments

## Mag Promo

### Independent. In print. In your mailbox.

Inexpensive, too! Subscribe today and get a full year of Mother Jones for just
$12.

Subscribe

![Mother Jones Magazine Cover : May + June

2019](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/mojocover_mj19_2400x3150.jpg.jpg?w=575)![Mother Jones

Magazine Cover : May + June 2019](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/mojocover_mj19_2400x3150.jpg.jpg?w=575) June 2019

![Mother Jones Magazine Cover : March + April

2019](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/01/mojocover_ma19_2400x3150.jpg?w=575)![Mother Jones

Magazine Cover : March + April 2019](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/01/mojocover_ma19_2400x3150.jpg?w=575) April 2019

![Mother Jones Magazine Cover : January + February

2019](https://motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/11/mojocover_jf19_2400x3150.jpg?w=575)![Mother Jones

Magazine Cover : January + February 2019](https://motherjones.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/11/mojocover_jf19_2400x3150.jpg?w=575) February 2019

## Podcast Promo

![podcast](/wp-content/themes/motherjones/img/the-mother-jones-podcast-

logo-615-615.png?w=200)![podcast](/wp-content/themes/motherjones/img/the-

mother-jones-podcast-logo-615-615.png?w=200)

### Smart. Fearless. Audio.

It's us but for your ears. Listen on Apple Podcasts.

Subscribe »

### Looking for news you can trust?

Subscribe to our free newsletters.

  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

  * About

  * Our Staff
  * Financials
  * Jobs
  * Events
  * Contact Us

  * Support

  * Ways to Give
  * Advertise With Us
  * Store

  * Subscribe

  * Magazine Subscriptions
  * Give a Gift Subscription
  * Email Newsletters
  * Podcasts
  * Customer Service

Copyright (C) 2019 Mother Jones and the Foundation for National Progress. All
Rights Reserved.

  * Terms of Service
  * Privacy Policy

![Powered by WordPress.com VIP](https://www.motherjones.com/wp-content/mu-

plugins/vip-helpers/images/vip-powered-light-small.png)

## We Noticed You Have An Ad Blocker On.

**ONE QUICK THING:** Did you see that _Mother Jones_ is launching a new
Corruption Project? Check it out, and if our plan makes sense to you, we hope
you'll help us raise $500,000 and go all in.

**ONE QUICK THING:** Did you see that _Mother Jones_ is launching a new
Corruption Project? Check it out, and if our plan makes sense to you, we hope
you'll help us raise $500,000 and go all in.

Donate Not Now

**THE _MOTHER JONES_ CORRUPTION PROJECT** We're crowdfunding to hire and build
a new beat focused on systemic corruption—investigating how democracy and the
rule of law are being undermined by those with wealth and power. Read why we
believe this is what the moment demands, and please help fund it with a tax-
deductible donation today.

**THE _MOTHER JONES_ CORRUPTION PROJECT** We're crowdfunding to hire and build
a new beat focused on systemic corruption—investigating how democracy is being
undermined by those with wealth and power. Read more, and please help fund it
with a tax-deductible donation today.

Donate Donate Donate No Thanks

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

