
>

>> ![Click here to visit

NOAA.gov](/sites/all/themes/custom/ncdc/images/logos/logo_noaa.png)

>>

>> National Climatic Data Center

>>

>> Skip to main content

>>

>> Skip to site search

>>

>> Formerly the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC)… more about NCEI »

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Home

>>  
>>                                   * Climate Information

>>  
>>                                   * Data Access

>>  
>>                                   * Customer Support

>>  
>>                                   * Contact

>>  
>>                                   * About

>>  
>>

>> Search Field:

>>

>> ## You are here

>>

>> Home > Perspectives Global Warming Home > Temperature Change and Carbon
Dioxide Change

>>

>> # Temperature Change and Carbon Dioxide Change

>>

>> One of the most remarkable aspects of the paleoclimate record is the strong
correspondence between temperature and the concentration of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere observed during the glacial cycles of the past several hundred
thousand years. When the carbon dioxide concentration goes up, temperature
goes up. When the carbon dioxide concentration goes down, temperature goes
down. A small part of the correspondence is due to the relationship between
temperature and the solubility of carbon dioxide in the surface ocean, but the
majority of the correspondence is consistent with a feedback between carbon
dioxide and climate. These changes are expected if Earth is in radiative
balance, and they are consistent with the role of greenhouse gases in climate
change. While it might seem simple to determine cause and effect between
carbon dioxide and climate from which change occurs first, or from some other
means, the determination of cause and effect remains exceedingly difficult.
Furthermore, other changes are involved in the glacial climate, including
altered vegetation, land surface characteristics, and ice sheet extent.

>>

>> ![Graph of temperature change and carbon dioxide change measured from the

EPICA Dome C ice core in Antarctica](/sites/default/files/Temperature-change-

and-carbon-dioxide-change-measured-from-the-EPICA-Dome-C-ice-core-in-

Antarctica-v2.jpg)

>>

>> Temperature change (light blue) and carbon dioxide change (dark blue)
measured from the EPICA Dome C ice core in Antarctica (Jouzel et al. 2007;
Luthi et al. 2008).

>>

>> Other paleoclimate proxies help us understand the role of the oceans in
past and future climate change. The ocean contains 60 times more carbon than
the atmosphere, and as expected, the changes in carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere were paralleled by changes in carbon in the ocean over the past
several hundred thousand years. While the ocean changes much more slowly than
the atmosphere, the ocean played an essential role in past variations in
carbon dioxide, and it will play a role in the future over thousands of years.

>>

>> Finally, paleoclimate data reveal that climate change is not just about
temperature. As carbon dioxide has changed in the past, many other aspects of
climate changed too. During glacial times, snow lines were lower, continents
were drier, and the tropical monsoons were weaker. Some of these changes may
be independent; others tightly coupled to the changing level of carbon
dioxide. Understanding which of these changes might occur in the future, and
how large those changes might be, remains a topic of vigorous research. NOAA's
Paleoclimatology Program helps scientists document the changes that have
occurred in the past as one approach to understanding future climate change.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Perspectives
Global Warming Home

>>  
>>                                   * Temperature Change

>>  
>>                                   * Last 2,000 Years

>>  
>>                                   * Last 1,000 Years

>>  
>>                                   * Before 2,000 Years

>>  
>>                                   * Mid-Holocene Warm Period

>>  
>>                                   * Penultimate Interglacial Period

>>  
>>                                   * Early Eocene Period

>>  
>>

>> ![Click to visit the U.S. Department of Commerce

website](/sites/all/themes/custom/ncdc/images/logos/logo_doc_dark.png) ![Click

to visit USA.gov](/sites/all/themes/custom/ncdc/images/logos/logo_usagov.png)
![Click to visit

Ready.gov](/sites/all/themes/custom/ncdc/images/logos/logo_ready.png)

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * About

>>  
>>                                   * Contact

>>  
>>                                   * Employment

>>  
>>                                   * Site Map

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * Privacy

>>  
>>                                   * FOIA

>>  
>>                                   * Information Quality

>>  
>>                                   * Disclaimer

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * Take Our Survey

>>  
>>                                   * Department of Commerce

>>  
>>                                   * NOAA

>>  
>>                                   * NESDIS

>>  
>>

>> Department of Commerce > NOAA > NESDIS > NCEI

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

