

![](images/blank.gif?crc=4208392903)

  * indicates required

Email Address *

First Name

Get Freya for free!

About Freya

Manual

Pregnancy

Blog

Subscribe to Freya’s news.

![](images/blank.gif?crc=4208392903)

CircleTime

Freya

LensTime

Pregnancy week by week

Most women are pregnant for an average of 280 days. Calculating from the first
day of the last menstrual period also gives a standard of measurement for
health care providers to follow, since it is extremely difficult to know
exactly when conception occurred. Only 25% of women gave birth from the 38th
to the 42nd week (which is considered normal).

Week 1

The development of pregnancy is counted from the first day of the woman’s last
normal menstrual period, even though the development of the foetus does not
begin until conception, which is about two weeks later depending on your
cycle’s length. Pregnancy is calculated from this day because each time a
woman has a period, her body is preparing for pregnancy.

Health: There may need to be some lifestyle changes made at this time to
increase your chances of conceiving and having a healthy baby. Adequate
exercise and a balanced diet are important factors to evaluate. Many times the
male partner does not feel he has a role in a potential pregnancy at this
time. However, his health and lifestyle can also affect your future baby. He
may need to consider what he eats and drinks, his intake of medication, and
habits such as smoking, and using drugs or alcohol. Men can also benefit from
taking vitamin supplements prior to conception.

Tip: Keep a record of your daily temperature if you are trying to get
pregnant. Track your ovulation by taking your temperature first thing each
morning (before you even get out of bed) using an oral thermometer available
in chemists’ shops everywhere. Record your temperature each day. When you see
it spike, you'll know that ovulation has occurred and you are ready to make a
baby.

Week 2

You: Last week an increase in the amount of oestrogen and progesterone flowing
through your bloodstream stimulated your uterus to form a potential fertilised
egg. At the same time, in your ovaries, eggs were ripening in fluid-filled
sacs called follicles. At the beginning of this week (often around day 14 of a
28-day cycle) you ovulate.

Health: Make sure your body is in the best possible shape for baby-making.
Don't forget to take a daily multivitamin that contains at least 400
micrograms of folic acid (starting no later than three months before you want
to conceive) to reduce your baby's risk of birth defects.

Week 3

Baby: This is the week of ovulation when the egg and sperm meet. Your baby's
nine-month journey begins as a fertilised egg whose cells multiply at a
dizzying rate of as many as 100,000 per minute. Filled with fluid, the
blastocyst, no larger than a pinhead, divides into two. One half will become
the foetus, the other attaches to the uterine wall and becomes the placenta.
Within hours of fertilisation, sex, eye colour, and even the texture of your
baby's hair have been decided.

You: Though you will likely feel nothing, as this is about the midpoint of
your cycle, your released egg will be swept into the fallopian tube and, if in
the next 24 hours one of the 350 million sperm in the average ejaculate makes
the successful swim up through the uterus and into the fallopian tube to
penetrate the egg, fertilisation will occur. The fertilised egg, or zygote,
immediately forms a barrier to prevent other sperm from penetrating. Soon it
begins dividing into a cluster of identical cells as it floats down the
fallopian tube to the uterus. This takes around 6 days, and after 7 days, it
implants into the wall of the uterus. The foetus comes into contact with the
mother’s bloodstream by the end of the third week of the cycle. Every woman is
different, and so are her experiences of pregnancy, and not every woman has
the same symptoms. Feeling very tired early on is normal in pregnancy.

Health: Do be sure you get enough folic acid to prevent neural tube defects in
the embryo. Folic acid needs to be present at the moment when an embryo's
cells curve over one another to create the neural tube, between the 25th and
28th day after conception, often before a woman knows she's expecting. While
it's possible to get enough folic acid from diet alone, experts advise that
every woman of childbearing age take a daily supplement of 400 micrograms.

Be careful: Haircuts and highlights are generally thought to be safe during
pregnancy, but dyeing your hair isn't recommended during the first trimester.
Ask your hair stylist about touching up your roots in a way that will see you
through the next three months, or consider adding highlights instead.

Tip: A blood pregnancy test can be positive within two or three days after
implantation.

Week 4

Baby: By the end of the first month the embryo is 1/10 inch (2.54mm) long. The
heart, no larger than a poppy seed, has started to beat. The uterus has formed
a bed of tissue, and the production of oestrogen and progesterone increases as
the uterus decides to hold onto its precious cargo - the cluster of cells that
nests inside. Some of these cells become attached to the uterine wall and form
the placenta, while others become the embryo. Implantation triggers the
production of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), the hormone that turns your
pregnancy test positive.

You: This is very likely the week you experience your first missed period or
see only some slight spotting, called implantation bleeding. You won't
experience any visible signs of pregnancy, but your body is changing in
amazing ways and you will feel exhausted. Your breasts become harder and more
tender. If you don't know you are pregnant, you may unwittingly attribute this
to PMT. In fact, you may attribute all of your pregnancy symptoms, bloating,
cramping, backache, mood swings, to the period that will not arrive. A woman
can start feeling unusually fatigued as soon as one week after conceiving.
There aren’t any immediate, obvious pregnancy symptoms, but there are signs
such as tiredness, loss of interest, mood swings and the constant need to
urinate.

Health: When you phone your doctor to make your first appointment, ask about
taking a folate supplement if you haven't already started. Don't wait until
you get an appointment. Weeks 5 through 10 are critical to neural development,
and so is the B vitamin folate, otherwise known as folic acid.

Exercise during pregnancy is considered both safe and smart. Studies indicate
that women in good physical shape have easier labours, a reduced risk of
caesarean section, and a faster recovery.

Be careful: Do stop smoking as soon as you suspect you are pregnant. When a
pregnant woman smokes, it reduces the flow of oxygen to her baby, which can
cause it to grow more slowly and gain less weight in the womb. Smoking during
pregnancy has also been linked to miscarriage and pre-term labour.

Tip: Most urine tests that are available in chemists’ shops can determine
pregnancy about two weeks after ovulation, but some more sensitive tests can
tell if you are pregnant as early as six days after you conceive, or one day
after you miss a period.

Week 5

Baby: It's only been a week since your embryo, about the size of an apple
seed, attached to the wall of your uterus, but already it has made many
developmental leaps. The placenta and the umbilical cord are functioning,
passing oxygen and nutrients between you and your baby. The cluster of cells
that will become your baby's heart has already formed, and the brain and
spinal cord are beginning to take shape. There’s plenty going on as the embryo
splits into three different sections. In one section, the brain and central
nervous system are already beginning to take shape as their neural tubes
develop. In the other two sections, the heart and circulatory system are
already beginning to form, and the lungs and intestines are in the very early
stages of development.

You: Other than that, things are pretty much the same on the outside, and you
don't look any different than you did a few weeks ago. Growing a baby is
exhausting work, however, and you may feel a little more tired than usual.

Health: If you aren't already taking them, now's the time to start on prenatal
vitamins. Even if you regularly eat a diet rich in vitamins and minerals, you
could be missing some of the more important ones, including folic acid,
calcium, and iron. Folic acid, a B vitamin, helps prevent neural tube defects
and reduces the chances of a pre-term delivery, iron plays a key role in the
production of red blood cells that carry oxygen in the blood, and calcium
builds your baby's bones and teeth.

If you weren't in shape before you conceived but want to start exercising,
first speak to your doctor or midwife. Exercise boosts your flagging energy
levels, a benefit during the first trimester when, like many women, you may
tire easily. It also strengthens your body to meet the physical demands of
pregnancy. Begin slowly with short walks or sign up for a prenatal exercise
class

Tip: Most initial prenatal check-ups take place between six and ten weeks, so
make an appointment if you haven't already done so.

Week 6

Baby: The embryo measures a little less than 1/5 of an inch (5mm) long and
looks more like a tadpole than a human. The forebrain forms a hollow stalk on
either side and develops small cups, the base of each will become an eyeball.
Inside the cup, skin cells will turn into a lens and cornea. The heart, no
bigger than a poppy seed, is beating now 160 beats per minute, and red blood
cells circulate through the foetus and chorionic villi. The neural tube, which
connects the brain and spinal cord, closes at this time. One end of the tube
forms the brain, the other the spinal cord. The kidneys, lungs and liver, are
now in place too, but they still have a lot of developing left to do. The
little buds which will become their arms and legs are also starting to grow.

You: No one would know you're pregnant just by looking at you, but you're
definitely aware of it, thanks to early symptoms, such as tender breasts and
nipples, constant fatigue, and frequent bathroom trips, tiredness and general
feelings of exhaustion might have really kicked in. You may even find that you
leak a little urine when you cough. This is due to the growing uterus pressing
on the bladder. It might be a good idea to wear lightweight sanitary pads.

Health: Apart from giving up bad habits, you'll also need to guard against
infection. Wash your hands frequently with soap and water, try to steer clear
of people who aren't feeling well, and let your partner clean out the cat
litter, bird cage, or fish tank. Cook meat, fish, poultry, and eggs until they
are well done, and don’t eat or drink unpasteurised dairy products or juice.
If your health care provider has given you the green light to exercise, take
advantage of it. Staying active will help you weather the physical changes
pregnancy brings, fight fatigue more effectively, and motivate you to eat more
nutritiously. It'll also help regulate your roller-coaster emotions, thanks to
the feel-good proteins called endorphins produced by the pituitary gland.
Improve muscle control by doing Kegel exercises (squeezing and releasing the
vaginal muscles 10 to 20 times in a row) several times a day.

Be careful: Check in with your obstetrician or doctor early and regularly to
learn how best to take care of yourself during pregnancy.

Tip: Ask your doctor every question you can think of. The doctor will take
time to answer your questions. If he/she doesn’t, then don’t leave until
you’re certain that your concerns have been addressed.

Week 7

Baby: By the end of this week, the embryo will more than double its length,
growing from approximately 4 to 5 millimetres (0.16inches to 0.2 inches) to 11
to 13 millimetres (0.43 inches to 0.52 inches). It is now about the size of a
raspberry. The head is disproportionately larger than the rest of the body,
and dark spots mark where the eyes and nostrils will be. The forebrain has
divided into the two parts that make up the cerebral hemispheres of the brain,
where as many as 100 nerve cells are created each minute.

You: This week, you'll probably go in for your first prenatal check-up with an
obstetrician or midwife who will discuss your medical history, including any
previous pregnancies and diseases or genetic disorders that might run in
either family, determine your due date, and begin to chart your weight gain.
She will also take some blood for routine lab tests - blood type, STDs,
rubella immunity, and complete blood count to check for anaemia. You may also
be given a pelvic examinationand perhaps a transvaginal ultrasound, which is
safe and painless, to check on the embryo. This is your chance to ask any
questions you have about the pregnancy. Start your list now and take it with
you, in case you get distracted once you are there.

Health: Make salads a mainstay of your diet. Your baby will thank you for all
the vitamins and minerals you're sending its way, and your body will be
grateful since your diet will help ward off constipation, a common pregnancy
complaint. Leafy greens, which are full of fibre, help keep you regular, but
if you just don't have a taste for them right now, eat other fibre-rich foods
such as apricots, raisins, and bran. Work out with light weights to tone your
hamstrings, buttocks, lower back, and shoulders. It'll strengthen you for the
demands of childbirth and give you the muscles.

Tip: Try to meet the midwife at your clinic sometime in the next six months so
that if you go into labour and your regular health care practitioner isn't on
call, your baby won't be delivered by a complete stranger. If your doctor has
a solo practice, ask what happens if they are out of town or unavailable, and
make a plan to meet the backup.

Week 8

Baby: If you could see your baby now, you'd be able to make out its eyelids,
the tip of its nose, and its upper lip. It’s approximately three-quarters of
an inch long from top to bottom, and its brain, spinal cord, heart, kidneys,
liver, and stomach have begun to take shape. The aortic and pulmonary valves
are distinctly present in the heart, which has now divided into right and left
chambers and gallops at twice your rate (about 150 times a minute). The baby
has distinct, slightly webbed fingers and toes and see-through skin.

You: Through the placental wall, the embryo is able to absorb oxygen,
proteins, sugar, and fat for the crucial task of building cells. Talk about
growing pains. Now that your uterus has expanded from a pre-pregnancy size of
a fist to its present grapefruit like proportions, you may feel occasional
cramping in your lower abdomen and sides. These cramps are normal and
shouldn't pose any risk to the baby.

Health: To keep nausea at bay, nibble on dry biscuits before you get out of
bed and eat smaller meals throughout the day rather than three large ones. Its
name notwithstanding, morning sickness can engulf you at any time of the day.
Fortunately, the queasy feeling usually goes away by the time you reach the
second trimester. If you're a regular gym goer, you can ease up a little. Your
heart rate is higher now, which means you won't need to exert as hard to get
the same aerobic result. Plus, the pregnancy hormone hCG makes it much easier
to get overheated, so take well-timed water breaks. Bottom line: Don't
exercise to the point where you get short of breath.

Be careful: Avoid cats! Cat faeces may contain parasites that cause
toxoplasmosis, an infection that is fairly harmless in grown-ups but can cause
developmental problems in babies, especially if you were to contract it in the
first trimester.

You can also get possible infections from eating raw or undercooked meat. Cook
meat to at least 160 degrees before eating, and wash hands with soap and water
after handling raw meat.

Week 9

Baby: The embryo may now officially be called a foetus, which literally means
"little one", and is about the size of a strawberry. An inch long (2.54cm), it
has hands that can flex at the wrist, and it is able to fold them over its
heart. Eyelids cover the eyes, and the ears are beginning to take shape on the
sides of the head. The genitals are forming, but your doctor won't yet be able
to discern what sex it is by ultrasound.

You: You may no longer feel as nauseated and fatigued as you've been the past
two months, and your sex drive may even be increasing. Thanks to a surge in
oestrogen and progesterone, there's more blood flow to the breasts, vagina,
labia, and clitoris, making them more sensitive. Your breasts continue to get
fuller, too, which means it's a good time to purchase a real maternity bra
with good support.

Health: Cheese is a great source for calcium, but avoid soft or mould-ripened
varieties like Brie, Camembert, and Stilton. They may contain listeria, a
bacterium that can cause a rare but serious infection in pregnant women called
listeriosis. Cream and cottage cheeses are fine, as are hard and American
cheeses. Listeria can also live in hot dogs and deli meats, so avoid them
completely or heat them until they're steaming hot before you take a bite.

Eat carb-filled foods like whole grain breads and cereal an hour or two before
you hit the gym so you're not hungry, and include water before, during, and
after so you're properly hydrated.

Be careful: It's time to delegate any paint jobs to your partner or hire a
professional. Smelling a small amount of polyurethane won't hurt the foetus,
but staying in a room filled with paint fumes is not recommended. Removing old
paint applied before 1978 can harm neurological development.

Week 10

Baby: This week, your baby measures about 1½ inches (3.8cm) from head to toe,
about as big as a small shrimp and similar in shape. Tooth buds are forming,
bones are growing, and hair is starting to sprout. The eyelids are fused shut
and will remain closed until week 27, but the baby can hear you now since the
inner workings of the ear are complete. Neurons appear at one end of the
spinal cord, and the basic divisions of the brain are present. Baby can also
bend its arms at the elbows and has distinct fingers. Genitals continue to
form, but your doctor still is not able to determine the sex yet, even by
ultrasound.

You: Your emotions may be in a state of rapid change, sending you on a wild
emotional ride punctuated by gleeful highs and frustrating lows. Pregnancy
hormones are driving the mood roller coaster. It doesn't help that you may
have spent much of the past weeks feeling queasy, exhausted, or anxious
(possibly all of the above). But the second trimester is just around the
corner, and with it may come welcome emotional relief as hormonal fluctuations
even out.

Health: Do eat for two - just don't eat twice as much! Add an extra 300
calories to your diet. It may sound like a lot, but it's actually the
equivalent of only about two and a half cups of low-fat milk. Make those
calories count by choosing healthy snacks like yogurt and fruit that will
boost your calcium intake and help you get your daily dose of vitamins and
minerals. But there's no more health risk to the occasional slice of cake than
there was before you were pregnant. Try prenatal yoga, it tones your upper
body and thigh muscles, making it easier to carry the extra weight. It also
strengthens your pelvic floor muscles, which will make a difference when it
comes time to push, and eases lower back pain.

Tip: Talk to your doctor or midwife about whether you should get a chorionic
villus sampling (CVS) test. CVS, usually performed between weeks 10 and 12,
checks for genetic abnormalities and is comparable to amniocentesis. Women who
choose CVS usually have a family history of genetic disease and are 35 years
old or older.

Week 11

Baby: Your little one is roughly the size of a thumb this week, but can
swallow and kick, and the fingernails have started to grow. The head is so big
it takes up almost half the length of the body, and a clear outline of the
spine is visible. If you have an appointment with your doctor or midwife this
week, she'll be able to pick up the speedy swoosh of a heartbeat with the help
of a special stethoscope called a Doppler. Experts say hearing a heartbeat at
this point is a major sign that the pregnancy is progressing as it should.

You: Your uterus, now the size of a grapefruit, has expanded to fill your
pelvis. The umbilical cord spirals as two arteries and a vein twist to fit
into the protective sheath holding them. The umbilical cord feeds your baby
all that it needs and works with the amniotic fluid to keep it safe.

Health: Do sleep on your side as often as possible, as experts say this
position increases blood flow to the baby. A body pillow, which you can order
at maternity stores, can help make side-sleeping more comfortable. It also
provides such snug support that some who've tried it can't live without it.

Kegel exercises strengthen your pelvic muscles and help ward off incontinence,
both during pregnancy and after delivery. Supplement quick squeezes of the
muscles around the vagina and anus with longer squeezes of 10 seconds, 10 to
20 times in a row, three times each day.

Be careful: If you have the flu? Before you reach for that bottle of over-the-
counter medicine, ask your doctor. Acetaminophen (the ingredient found in
Tylenol) and many antacids are generally OK, but cough syrups, cold remedies,
and other products may have ingredients that can harm a developing baby. Never
use Ibuprofen during your pregnancy.

Week 12

Baby: You're reaching an important milestone, the end of the first trimester.
Your baby now weighs about half an ounce and is about 2½ inches (6.35cm) long
from top to bottom. It can open its mouth and wiggle its fingers and toes,
upon which tiny nails have begun to grow. Brain development is in high gear,
as foetal nerve cells multiply rapidly and synapses start firing.

You: Your uterus has moved from the pelvic floor to the front of your abdomen,
which, fingers crossed, may ease the pressure on your bladder, cutting down on
bathroom breaks. A dark vertical line of pigmentation, called linea nigra, may
appear on your belly. If so, don't worry! It will disappear soon after birth.

Health: So much for that fabled glow: Dermatologists say the same hormones
that may keep one expectant mother’s complexion blemish-free can cause a bout
of acne in another. If you do suffer from this, use oil-free, non-comedogenic
makeup to cover spots.

If you lift weights, decrease the number of pounds you're using, and watch
your pulse when doing cardio exercises (a heart-rate monitor, which most gyms
supply for their members, can do this for you). You don't want your heartbeats
to reach more than 140 beats per minute, at which point your body may get
overheated and blood flow may be diverted away from the uterus.

Be careful: Try avoiding fatty, acidic, or spicy foods, and eat small,
frequent meals. Wait a few hours after eating before lying down. You can also
take antacids with calcium carbonate.

Tip: "If you need help or advice, ask for it, but don't worry too much about
hurting other people's feelings by not doing what they say. If your gut says
no, trust it. Do what seems right." Ariel Gore

Week 13

Baby: As the second trimester begins, your baby is growing quickly. It weighs
about ¾ of an ounce (21.6g) and measures between 2½ to 3 inches (6.35cm to
7.6cm) from the top of the head to its bottom. It is in the foetal period,
when the organs and tissues that took shape in the first trimester start to
develop. The intestines, originally part of the umbilical cord, have found a
new home in the abdominal cavity. The tongue and vocal chords are also getting
ready for their debut at birth, and the eyes are moving closer together.
Baby’s ears are in place, and the head is roughly half the size of the whole
body. (By birth, the head will be one quarter the size of the body.)

You: If you have a check-up this week, your doctor or midwife may be able to
feel the top of your uterus in the lower half of your abdomen. As it grows,
your uterus will fill your pelvis, expanding up and out, and soon you'll
definitely look the part of a pregnant woman.

Health: Studies show that moderate caffeine intake is fine for expectant
mothers, but too much can dehydrate you and reduce your body's calcium, which
your baby needs to grow strong teeth and bones. But coffee isn't the only
caffeine-laden beverage out there. The ingredient is also found in soda, tea,
and cocoa, so be careful how much you indulge in these drinks, too, or choose
decaffeinated alternatives.

Your fitness regime is getting a makeover now that you're expecting. Avoid
anything that requires the Valsalva manoeuvre, which happens when you exhale
with great force (during weight lifting, for example); it can raise your blood
pressure to dangerous levels.

Be careful: Avoid anything that requires the Valsalva manoeuvre.

Tip: Sign up now for childbirth classes, even though you won't be attending
them for weeks (they usually begin in the seventh month). They're so popular
that sessions fill up quickly. It's best to plan ahead to get the time slot
that works best for you. Ask your doctor or midwife for a recommendation, or
call your hospital or birthing centre.

Week 14

Baby: Make a fist - that's how big your baby is now. At week 14, it weighs
close to an ounce (29 g) and measures between three and four inches (7.6cm to
10.16cm) from top to toe. Like you, it can make a fist, too, with fingers that
have a unique set of prints; an epidermal layer in his skin shows genetically
determined ridges on the tips and palms. In the next eight weeks the bones
throughout its body will harden as calcium gets deposited. Your baby's neck is
now getting longer too, which means the chin doesn't have to rest on the chest
anymore.

You: The nausea may finally be getting less, only to be replaced by yet
another complaint, abdominal aches. That's because your uterus is growing, and
the surrounding ligaments are stretching right along with it.

Health: Kegel exercises strengthen the vaginal and perineal muscles, which
will help prevent incontinence, prime you for pushing, and lessen tearing
during birth. To keep them in shape: Lie down on the floor and contract, as if
you're stopping your urine midstream, and release your muscles for a few
minutes at a time, once or twice a day.

Be careful: Do try to be extra vigilant about dental hygiene, because
pregnancy makes your gums swell, leaving them vulnerable to germs and open to
infection. Brush your teeth and tongue after every meal, and finish with an
antibacterial mouthwash once a day. Ask your dentist about scheduling more
cleanings throughout your pregnancy (they're worth the extra out-of-pocket
costs). Save the X-rays until you're postpartum.

Tip: If you wear contact lenses, don't be surprised if they feel like they no
longer fit. The shape of your eyes has changed, and you don't produce tears as
much as you used to. Ask your doctor if you need a new prescription, or don’t
use contact lenses and rely on your glasses for the rest of the pregnancy.

Week 15

Baby: Your baby weighs about 1¾ ounces (50 grams)and measures about 4½ inches
(11.5cm) from head to toe. Fine, downy hair called lanugo, which it will shed
before birth, grows on its body. Hair is sprouting on top of the head, too,
although whatever colour it is may change. The eyebrows have begun to fill in.
Your baby hiccups, but it can't yet make a sound because the trachea is still
filled with fluid, not air. The intestinal tract continues to develop.

You: These days, pregnancy is leaving you slightly breathless, literally. It's
slightly annoying, but unfortunately you can expect the problem to worsen as
your uterus pushes up against your diaphragm, leaving little room for the
lungs to expand. It's nothing to worry about.

Health: Discuss with your doctor or midwife the pros and cons of taking the
triple screen, a blood test given in the next few weeks that measures your
baby's risk for birth defects such as Down’s Syndrome and Spina Bifida. It
gives you valuable information about the health of your baby, but false
positives are common; out of 1,000 women, 50 will be told that their foetus is
at risk, but only one or two babies will actually be born with Down’s
Syndrome. This is the same as the amniocentesis test, see above.

It's not too late to sign up for prenatal yoga, a gentle regime that combines
exercise tailored especially for your changing body with breathing techniques.

Be careful: You should call your doctor immediately if you're unable to catch
your breath, your fingertips turn blue, or your heart feels like it's trying
to jump out of your chest.

Tip: Your off-and-on libido may now be returning from its nausea and fatigue-
induced first-trimester sabbatical, so take advantage of it while it's here.
It just may pull another disappearing act sometime during the third trimester.
But avoid one position: the missionary position. Lying flat on your back is
not a good idea because it may put too much pressure on the veins that deliver
oxygen to the baby.

Week 16

Baby: It's the end of your fourth month, and your baby now weighs 2½ ounces
(71 grams). It is able to kick its legs, which are measurably longer than the
arms that it often swings about as it floats in an amniotic fluid. You may be
able to discern some of the movements now; some women say they're like
butterfly wings flapping gently. Some first-time mothers don't feel anything,
though, until the 24th week. The baby may be seen sucking its thumb during
ultrasound this month.

You: Your increasing blood and amniotic fluid volume, growing breasts,
expanding uterus, and placenta have caused you to gain weight, but you may not
be showing just yet. Give it a few weeks, and then the world will know that
your baby's on the way.

Health: Pamper yourself by taking a steamy shower every morning. Indulging in
20-minute steam showers or using a humidifier can help clear the stuffy head
that often plagues pregnant women. If you feel like you've got a permanent
head cold, it's because more blood than usual is flowing to your mucous
membranes, causing them to swell. Saline drops can help unblock your nose.

Stand up straight to compensate for your growing uterus, increasingly heavy
breasts, and shifting centre of gravity, all of which can exaggerate the curve
in your spine and put unnecessary strain on your back. Good posture is
important, especially when you're working out, so imagine that the top of your
head is being pulled toward the ceiling. You'll automatically straighten your
neck, lift your shoulders, and tuck in your stomach and buttocks.

Be careful: Suffering from a headache? Forget the aspirin and Ibuprofen, which
aren't safe for pregnant women since they could hurt your baby's development.

Tip: Worried about weight gain? For many expectant women it is a concern.
"Focus on the fact that you are giving yourself and your baby quality
nutrition, and let the weight do what it will." - Kathy Kaehler, fitness
expert and Los Angeles mother of three.

Week 17

Baby: From head to toe your baby measures about 7¾ inches (19.68cm). It weighs
about 5 ounces (142 g), but not for long, as fat is starting to fill out its
body and keeps it warm. By the time baby is born, fat will account for two-
thirds of the body weight. It has eyelashes now, although it is months away
from being able to blink.

You: Your uterus is about 2 inches (5.08cm) below your belly button. As baby
fills the pelvis, it pushes up against your intestines, shifting them aside.
Your lower abdomen swells with child, literally inside, the placenta is
working hard to support and nourish your baby, its network of blood vessels
delivering nutrients and removing waste.

Health: Some women suffer migraine headaches for the first time during
pregnancy, which doctors think is caused by fluctuating oestrogen levels.
Unfortunately, you can't rely on medications to make them go away. Instead,
you can lessen the onset of migraines by avoiding triggers such as chocolate,
MSG and caffeine. Minimise stress and try to get enough sleep (admittedly,
that's easier said than done).

Don’t do exercises that call for you to lie flat on your back. After the
fourth or fifth month, the position puts you at risk for compressing a major
blood vessel, called the vena cava, and decreasing blood flow to the baby.

Tip: Experts recommend eating six small meals throughout the day instead of
three large ones to ease indigestion (caused by pregnancy hormones that slow
down the digestion process). This way, you'll also avoid the nausea that kicks
in when you go for hours without eating.

Week 18

Baby: Your baby's about 8 inches (20.32cm) long and weighs a little more than
5 ounces (142 g). Although it is enveloped by the familiar sound of your
beating heart and rushing blood, it is conscious of noises from the outside
world, too. They filter through the bones forming in the ears and to the
developing brain. The sense of sight is evolving as well; the retinas are more
sensitive to light, and if you relax under a hot sun, it will perceive a red
glow. Other skills the baby demonstrates: yawning, swallowing, sucking,
hiccupping and making faces.

You: Now comparable in size to a cantaloupe melon, your uterus lies just south
of your navel. As it grows and shifts your centre of gravity, you may feel
slightly off balance. The hormone Relaxin also loosens your joints, which can
affect your posture and take a toll on your lower back.

Health: Don't be alarmed if you feel sharp pains running from the top of your
uterus down to your pubic bone. Ligaments are stretching to support the
growing weight of your womb. The feeling will pass if you lie on your side
with a pillow supporting your belly.

If you aren't already exercising, it isn't too late to start. Exercise will
pep you up, curb stress, and tone your abdominal muscles. Check first with
your doctor or midwife before you start going to the gym, though. Low-impact
activities that are easy on the joints, such as walking, swimming, and
prenatal yoga, may be your best bet.

Be careful: Cook seafood thoroughly to eliminate parasites or bacteria that
could compromise your growing baby's health, and stay away from raw fish like
sushi or oysters. Shark, swordfish, king mackerel, and tilefish are off-
limits for now, since they've been found to have high levels of methyl mercury
that could hamper brain development. Experts also suggest you limit canned
tuna to six ounces per week.

Week 19

Baby: Your baby weighs approximately 7 ounces (200 g) and measures
approximately 9 inches (22.86cm) long. The arms and legs are now properly
proportioned. The motor neurons between the muscles and the brain are
connecting, giving the baby control over his movements, so it kicks, rolls,
and stretches whenever it feels like it. The gums have tooth buds, and
throughout the body, rubbery cartilage is turning into bone. Myelin, a
protective substance, envelops the spinal cord.

You: Ideally, you will have gained between 8 pounds (3.5 kgs) and 14 pounds
(6.5kgs) by this stage, 6 ounces (0.17g) of which account for the placenta, 11
ounces (0.32g) the amniotic fluid, and 12 ounces (0.34 g) total for both
breasts. Thanks to gravity and a rapid drop in blood pressure, you may feel
dizzy when you get up too quickly from a sitting, squatting, or kneeling
position. You may also get sleepy when you lie down, as your expanding uterus
exerts pressure on your aorta and vena cava.

Health: Eat up. While it's a good idea to keep weight gain to no more than 35
pounds during pregnancy, dieting can hurt the baby. You may miss out on
nutrients that are vital for foetal development, and if you're underweight
you're at risk of having a low birth weight or preterm baby. Vegetables,
fruits, whole grains, and low-fat dairy products are healthy choices.

If your back is starting to complain, try this easy stretch: Sit in a chair or
on the floor with your legs stretched out in front of you. Slowly drop your
head toward your knees, and reach for your toes with your fingertips as far as
they will comfortably go. Straighten up slowly. Someday soon, you'll repeat
this process, not for the stretch but to reach for pieces of far-flung
macaroni.

Be careful: Don't indulge in very hot baths right now. Hot tubs aren't so hot
for pregnant women; the intense heat can hurt your developing baby. If you
long for a warm bath to ease your aches and pains, a ten-minute dip in warm
water (36 degrees C or lower) won't harm you.

Tip: While you may save a lot on used baby equipment like high chairs and
bouncy seats, purchase a brand-new car seat that meets all the latest safety
requirements. Newer versions are updated with useful items you can't find in
older models, like restraints that work with the universal anchoring system.
Most car models from 2000 on come equipped with anchors that the restraints
hook onto, which makes fastening a car seat much easier than struggling with
the seatbelt.

Week 20

Baby: Your baby weighs between ½ to 1 pound this week (0.23 to 0.45 kgs) and
is 10 inches (25.4cm) long from top to toe. A creamy, protective coating
called vernix caseosa, which is secreted by the glands, coats the skin,
protecting it from the amniotic fluid. The baby is practising for its first
breath outside the womb, moving its chest up and down as if it was breathing
through the nose. The genitals are fully formed.

You: Congratulations - you're halfway there! At this stage, your oval-shaped
uterus is nearly level with your belly button and grows a centimetre (almost ½
inch) each week. If you're scheduled for a check-up, your doctor or midwife
may no longer need to use a Doppler to hear your baby's heartbeat; the sound
is loud enough that a regular stethoscope can easily do the job.

Health: Lactose intolerant? Instead of giving up milk altogether, try calcium-
and vitamin D-enriched rice or soy milk. Cheese is also a good source of
calcium, which your baby needs to form strong teeth and bones; it doesn't have
as much lactose as regular milk and may be easier to digest. Yogurt is another
good choice. Power up for a workout by eating a light snack - a piece of fruit
or a handful of crackers will do - an hour beforehand. If you don't consume
enough calories, you'll feel lethargic, light-headed, and weak, and you may
end up skipping your workout altogether.

Tip: Pregnancy can cause your nails to grow faster, making it a hassle to keep
up with constant retouching. Choose lighter, more natural hues that won't show
chipping or opt for low-maintenance nails, shaping them with a file and
polishing them with a buffer.

Week 21

Baby: Your baby now measures about seven inches (178mm) from head to toe and
weighs about 10½ ounces (298 grams). Now that the digestive system is fairly
sophisticated, your little one can swallow amniotic fluid, which makes for a
surprisingly nutritious drink that helps fatten them up. The act of swallowing
also prepares the digestive system for the hard work it will do once it’s
born. Your baby can taste what it ingests, thanks to taste buds that have
developed on the tongue. Nerve cells are working overtime to make connections,
and development continues its brisk pace for the five senses.

You: Your uterus continues to rise, taking its place about ½ inch (1.27cm)
above the belly button this week. You're probably feeling pretty good, at
least compared to the turbulent first trimester. The nausea has gone away, the
bathroom breaks are less frequent, and you're probably feeling more energetic
than you have in a long while.

Health: Talk to your health practitioner about increasing your intake of
vitamin B6 to help ease nausea, or ask about a new prenatal vitamin called
PremesisRx that has a greater amount of vitamin B6 combined with folic acid
and calcium carbonate. (It doesn't include iron, which can upset the stomach,
but your doctor can advise you on food sources that will supply iron.) Sip
water every 15 to 20 minutes during your workouts to replace liquids you lose
through sweating.

Be careful: The colour of your urine is a fairly accurate indicator of how
hydrated you are: If it's clear or pale yellow, you're fine; if it's darker,
drink up.

Tip: You're halfway through the pregnancy and your libido is in overdrive, but
sex isn't comfortable because of your growing belly. Try staying on top, which
prevents your tummy from getting jostled and takes the pressure off your
abdomen. Another position to try is spooning: both of you on your side with
him cradling you from behind.

Week 22

Baby: Slowly and steadily, your baby is getting bigger, topping 12 ounces (340
g) this week and growing to 11 inches (28 cm) from head to toe. It won't be
able to smile until months after birth, but growth is underway now to prepare
for that camera-worthy day. The first canines and molars are developing from
hard tissue below the gum line. It has eyes now, although the irises have no
pigment. Of the five senses, touch is the first one to develop in the womb;
your baby makes sense of its world by feeling its way around and registering
the sensations as it rolls, kicks, and stretches. And now that it has a full
set of neurons, it can process everything it is discovering around it.

You: Sugary treats and chocolate rank high on a list of things expectant women
crave, as well as citrus fruits and juices. But dislikes are just as common
during pregnancy; those spicy spring rolls you once loved to eat or the
pungent perfume you used to wear may turn your stomach now.

Health: Time to slow down and opt for some low-impact exercise. Water aerobics
and swimming make you feel virtually weightless and free your legs and feet
from their constant weight-bearing role.

Be careful: Call your doctor or midwife if you notice any bleeding, severe
headaches, sudden swelling in your hands and face, or constant abdominal pain,
or if you're persistently vomiting, have diarrhoea, or a high fever for more
than 24 hours. Any one of these symptoms could signal a potentially serious
problem. If you're not sure what's happening, check in just to be safe.

Tip: If sleep eludes you due to restlessness or discomfort, toss aside the
covers and find something boring to do. Experts say it's better to put
yourself in a dimly-lit room and watch TV or find a boring job to do. You'll
soon be nodding off.

Week 23

Baby: Your baby continues to put on weight, bringing it up to about a pound
this week (0.45kg), although with its red, wrinkly, and loose skin it’s far
from the bonny baby it will become. From top to toe your baby is between 11
and 12 inches long, (28 cm to 30.5cm) and makes the most of the space inside
the womb, kicking back, stretching its arms, and trailing its hands along the
umbilical cord. It can hear now and is especially sensitive to loud noises,
which can startle it, making the heart thump and the arms flail. Your baby
much prefers soothing music or the faint sound of your voice.

You: Your uterus inches up above your belly button, and your shape gets more
rounded. As a result, if you had an "innie" belly button, it's likely now an
"outie." You may have felt your appetite increase, and for good reason: Your
body needs a generous supply of nutrients, especially protein and fat, for
your baby's organ development and overall health and strength.

Health: Tempted to visit a centre that specialises in three-dimensional
ultrasound? If the procedure hasn't been ordered by your doctor, think again.
You likely had your first ultrasound between week 15 and week 20. Before
signing up for a second procedure, check with your health practitioner to find
out how prolonged or repeated exposure to ultrasound waves could affect the
foetus.

Most experts agree that exercise helps you weather the aches and pains of
pregnancy and may even prevent serious illnesses such as gestational diabetes.

Be careful: Still, long and hard workouts can be too much of a good thing.
Limit your regime to no more than 30 minutes a day, which is what the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists recommends for most women. (The
guidelines are a little different if you're an athlete.)

Tip: If you're short on space and want to get the best value for money, look
for nursery furniture that does double duty. Some choices: a crib that
converts to a toddler bed, or a changing table that can later be used as a
dresser.

Week 24

Baby: Your baby is about 12 inches (30.5cm) long and weighs a little over a
pound (nearly half a kilo). It has developed the sweet face you'll soon see,
with eyes and ears placed just where they should be. It will be big enough
that it can no longer do cartwheels and tumbles, but it is just as touchy-
feely with the surroundings as it has been. It is also even more attuned into
sounds outside the womb. If a loud noise disturbs your baby, it may be
restless for hours.

You: Faint red marks may begin to stretch across your abdomen now that your
uterus has risen to 2 inches (5.1cm) above your belly button. They may also
show up on your hips and breasts. While there's not much you can do to stop
stretch marks from appearing, know that soon after delivery they'll likely
fade to nearly invisible silvery or white streaks.

Health: Even if you're pressed for time, try not to skip warm-ups and cool-
downs at your exercise class. Easing into and out of a workout prevents
injuries and slowly increases or decreases your breathing and heart rates.
Some quick and easy moves - rotate your arms in large circles and walk in
place.

Be careful: Wear sunglasses when you go out in warmer months. It's a good
habit to develop even if you aren't pregnant, but it's especially helpful now
that your eyes have grown more sensitive to the light.

Tip: Breaking up is hard to do, but if you're unhappy with the care you're
receiving from your doctor or midwife and have tried to address it without
success, make a change. Staying with a health-care provider with whom you are
uncomfortable short-changes both you and your baby. When you go into labour,
you'll want someone whom you trust completely by your side.

Week 25

Baby: This week, your baby weighs approximately 1½ pounds (0.68kg). The heart
is beating so loudly that anyone who presses an ear to your belly can hear it.
Its lungs are getting ready to take their first breath, and, though the sex of
your baby was determined long ago, genital differentiation is now becoming
complete. It can make a fist and reach its feet, and it may already exhibit a
preference for the left or right hand.

You: Baby is now about the size of a football. During the day, you're juggling
the many tasks related to the baby's arrival, including touring hospitals,
ordering equipment, and going for check-ups, but you're just as busy at night,
when vivid and lengthy dreams take centre stage.

Health: Do keep a water bottle handy and drink from it frequently. Staying
hydrated prevents swelling in your hands and feet, which is common at this
stage, especially when it's hot and humid. If your hands and face seem
unusually puffy or if swelling comes on suddenly, check in with your health
care provider. You'll want to rule out Pre-eclampsia, a potentially dangerous
health condition that can occur during pregnancy.

Be extra careful as your pregnancy progresses. Your balance is increasingly
precarious, so take extra care during exercises that require hopping or quick
changes of direction, such as jogging and step aerobics.

Be careful: Be sure to schedule any flights for before your 36th week, which
is the cut-off for most airlines. (If you're at risk for pre-term labour your
doctor or midwife may stop you flying even earlier.) Experts have linked
sitting still during long flights to the formation of potentially harmful
blood clots, so be sure to stand up and stretch your legs often.

Week 26

Baby: For months your baby's eyes have been shut, but now they're almost fully
developed and will soon be ready to open. Interestingly, whatever the
ethnicity, the eyes are blue at this time: The irises don't display their
final colour until a few months after birth. Your baby's brain is maturing
rapidly, and it is growing quickly. Your baby is more than a foot long
(30.5cm) and two pounds (almost 1kg) this week.

You: You have a little more than a third of your pregnancy to go and,
unfortunately, you're starting to feel it - your back hurts, your legs are
cramping up, and your pelvic area feels heavy from the load you're carrying.
But there's good news: If you're like most pregnant women, your hair is
probably at its most luxurious, with extra body enhanced by higher levels of
oestrogen and progesterone. For a select few, though, your hair just lies
flat; but within six months after birth, it will return to normal.

Health: Your baby is relying on your body's iron stores, so do fill up on
iron-rich foods, such as lentils and spinach, especially if you're a
vegetarian. Your doctor may suggest supplementing your diet with iron pills to
go along with your prenatal vitamins. Keep bottles of vitamins and pills out
in the open where you can see them - it may help you to remember to take them.
Your thighs help carry the weight of your uterus and baby, so consider giving
them a break. Stretch your thighs by sitting on the floor and crossing your
right ankle over your left knee. Keeping your right hand on the floor, pull
the right thigh toward the left, and gaze outward over your right shoulder.
Hold the position and then stretch in the other direction.

Be careful: If you're decorating a nursery from top to bottom, plan on
finishing it weeks before the baby arrives. Because newly applied wallpaper,
paint, and glaze release potentially harmful fumes, allow for as much as eight
weeks' aeration with the windows open.

Week 27

Baby: At 13 weeks from birth, your baby is now almost 14 inches (36cm)from
head to toe and weighs a little more than two pounds (0.91kg). It is bulking
up with fat to keep warm after it's born, and the lungs continue to develop.
The immune system is also gearing up for life outside the womb. Your baby has
discovered thumb sucking, which isn't such a bad thing in the womb--it helps
strengthen the cheek and jaw.

You: Lately, you may be feeling your uterus tighten and clench for as long as
two minutes. The sensations shouldn't be painful, but they can cause
discomfort. They're called Braxton-Hicks contractions, which many women
mistake for labour. They serve to prepare the uterus for delivery.

Health: Keep a diary if mood swings leave you feeling exhausted and confused.
Writing can help you get understand your emotions, which, due to fluctuating
hormone levels might switch from joy to anxiety to excitement at any given
time.

Vigorous exercise keeps you strong during pregnancy, but it can be dangerous
for women with certain pregnancy complications. Ask your doctor's advice about
exercise if you develop Pre-eclampsia (pregnancy-induced high blood pressure),
are expecting more than one baby, are at risk for pre-term labour (or have
previously given birth prematurely), have an incompetent cervix, or have had
some vaginal bleeding.

Tip: Want to be more comfortable at your desk? Buy a footstool (most maternity
and baby stores carry them), and use it to relieve pressure on your hip joints
and lower back.

Week 28

Baby: At the beginning of the third trimester, your baby measures 14 inches
(35.5cm) and weighs about 2½ pounds (1.13kg), having doubled its weight in a
month. The brain tissue continues to develop folds and grooves on what was
once a smooth surface. Even though it is bigger, your baby still has plenty of
room to turn around, so whatever position it is in right now will likely
change over the next three months.

You: At this point, you've probably gained between 17 and 24 pounds (7.71 and
10.89kgs). Your uterus has moved to 3 inches (7.6cm) above your navel and is
pressing against the tubes between the kidneys and bladder, slowing the flow
of urine. Also, the hormone progesterone makes it difficult for your urinary
system to flush bacteria such as E. coli out of the bladder, leaving you more
susceptible to urinary tract infections. Left untreated, UTIs can develop into
more serious kidney infections or cause pre-term labour. If you feel any pain
or burning when you urinate, call your health care provider immediately.

Health: Just to be prepared, ask your doctor under which conditions labour may
have to be induced and what procedures might be involved. Although most babies
born post-term have no problems, the risk of complications rises the longer
you go past your due date. Even if you end up delivering right on time,
preparing for other scenarios will give you peace of mind. For an easy arm
stretch, stand or sit and clasp your hands behind your back. Pull them back
and down, then release. Repeat ten times.

Be careful: Do beware of joint pain. If you're at a computer for long
stretches, take frequent breaks to give your fingers, wrists, and arms a rest.
Your body's retaining fluid, causing nerves to swell and pinch, which could
result in carpal tunnel syndrome. Also, check that your setup is ergonomically
sound: Your forearms and wrists should be straight and run parallel to the
floor as you type, neither reaching too far up nor down.

Tip: If parents and in-laws aren't on board with your birth plans (you want a
natural birth, for example, and they point out that anaesthesia didn't hurt
their babies), thank them for their opinions but avoid getting into arguments.
Focus instead on how wonderful it is that they're so concerned. Learning how
to be diplomatic now will help you navigate future parental land mines.

Week 29

Baby: Every day, your little one is looking more like a full-grown baby than a
foetus. By the end of this week, it will weigh about 2¾ pounds (1.5kg). For
the rest of the trimester, your baby will be putting on weight and gaining
approximately ½ pound a week (0.23kg); between now and its birthday, it will
double or even triple in weight. The kicks and jabs are more vigorous now, and
you feel like it’s moving all the time.

You: The top of your uterus is 4 inches (10.2cm)above your belly button,
crowding your ribs and diaphragm and leaving you breathless. It's also
pressing against your bladder, which is why you're making so many trips to the
bathroom once again. The placenta, which is flat and round like a cake and
delivers oxygen and nutrients to the baby, is also getting bigger; next week,
it will weigh 15 ounces (0.43kg). Your baby may be in a head-down position
already, prepared for birth. Even if it is in a bottom-down position (called
breech), there's still time for baby to turn. When it does, it will drop lower
in your abdomen, the head engaging within the pelvic bones at the birth canal.

Health: Although you're months away from giving birth, read as much as you can
about labour and delivery. Studies show that if you understand how labour
works, you may feel you have more control over the process. In turn, you'll be
less fearful and may not feel the pain as strongly as you would if you were
feeling vulnerable and uninformed. Knowledge truly is power.

Ask your doctor how to check your rectus abdominus, the central muscle that
runs down the front of the abdomen and supports the back. During pregnancy it
may separate by more than the width of two finger lengths, but don't worry,
the gap usually disappears after birth. Note that you should not be doing
exercises that work the abdomen at this stage.

Tip: feast on fatty foods, just not the ice-cream-and-greasy-bacon type. A
"good" type of fat, called docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), helps brain and nerve
cells develop. DHA can be found in canola, flaxseed, and walnut oils, and in
fatty fish like salmon. Try using walnut oil in your salad dressing.

Week 30

Baby: Rock-a-bye baby, indeed!! Your baby goes to sleep now. When it is not
asleep, baby will be busy making faces, dancing around, hiccupping, and
nudging you. Baby weighs almost 3 pounds (1.37kg) and is about 14½ inches
(36.8cm) long. It is close to having a fully functioning nervous system that
regulates the body, and the nerve fibres are now encased in myelin, which
allows impulses to travel faster.

You: The not-so-pretty side of pregnancy reappears in the third trimester.
Constant urination, swollen feet, painful haemorrhoids, searing back pain, and
burning acid reflux. It's no surprise you aren't getting much sleep, giving
rise to yet another complaint: insomnia. In fact, some experts say prenatal
insomnia prepares you for life with a new-born. But in about ten weeks, your
aches and pains will fade away, to be replaced with a cooing baby in your
arms.

Health: Research shows that pregnant women suffer from sleep problems mostly
during the third trimester, usually because they have to get up at night to
urinate. To get more night-time rest, drink most of the fluids you need before
6pm; just make sure to drink plenty of water during the day. Hormones continue
to soften the tissues around your joints, making it easy to overextend them.
If you lift weights, lighten your load by 5 to 15 percent.

Be careful: Avoid harsh soaps that rob your skin of its natural oils. If your
skin is itchy, take a soothing, warm oatmeal bath; you can buy pre-packaged
sachets at most pharmacies. After your bath, generously apply cocoa butter or
vitamin E-based moisturiser all over your body.

Tip: When the baby's here, you'll need to give your arms a break from carrying
them, so invest in a soft carrier. Your new-born can face you and snuggle to
the soothing sound of your beating heart; when it is older, baby can look out
and watch the world come and go. Before you give birth, practise putting the
carrier on and taking it off so that you're a pro when the time comes.

Week 31

Baby: Your baby is growing at such a rate that the weight gain outpaces the
speed at which the limbs are growing. It is now almost 15 inches (38cm) from
head to toe. It is shedding the lanugo, and the eyebrows and eyelashes are
filling in.

You: Your prepregnancy shoes may no longer fit you well. Pressure from your
increasingly heavy uterus is funnelling blood and other fluids to your legs,
resulting in swollen feet. It's also squeezing your stomach, which makes it
difficult to eat without quickly feeling too full. Raise your feet at every
opportunity and, if weather permits, wear sandals.

Health: When you're pregnant, your eyes can become easily irritated and
sensitive to light, so ask your ophthalmologist to recommend eye drops. Take
frequent breaks from the computer screen, and if you use contacts, wear them
for fewer hours each day than you ordinarily do.

Multitask by doing your Kegels while watching TV or reading the paper. Kegel
exercises help to strengthen vaginal muscles and to prevent incontinence
during pregnancy and postpartum. Contract and release the muscles between your
vagina and anus, as if you're trying to suppress and release your urine
midstream. Do this for a few minutes at a time, once or twice a day.

Tip: Do write a birth plan if you haven't already. It will make you think
ahead to choices you will need to make about labour and delivery. Think about
whether or not you want an epidural, which birthing positions you'd like to
try. While childbirth may not turn out exactly as you imagine it, the document
will be a useful reminder of your goals once you're in labour. If you want to
do a little research on the pros and cons of your choices, now's the time.

Week 32

Baby: Your normally energetic baby has started to chill out a bit. Its
movements feel more like squirms and rolls rather than hyperactive kickboxing
sessions. That's because this week, when baby is 3 pounds (1.37kg) and 15
inches (38cm) long, it has begun to run out of room (or should we say womb?).
Beneath the skin is a nice layer of fat, and although it still relies on the
umbilical cord for nourishment, the digestive tract is almost fully developed.
Foetal brain scans show that babies this age actually have rapid eye
movements, which means they're dreaming. Who knows what dreams now fill your
baby's slumber.

You: Your uterus rises 5 inches (12.7cm) higher than your belly button. The
mid-pregnancy honeymoon period, when discomforts subsided, is over, and you
may be bothered by a list of old and new complaints: shortness of breath,
heartburn, fatigue, varicose veins, and constipation.

Health: During pregnancy, you need 60 grams of protein each day to help your
baby grow (the amino acids found in protein are integral to foetal
development). That's the equivalent of a two to three-ounce serving (57g to 85
g) - about the size of a deck of cards -of cooked, lean poultry, beef, pork,
or fish. If you'd rather not eat meat, there are plenty of other sources,
including skimmed milk, cheese, yogurt, eggs, and peanut butter.

If you ever feel faint during a workout, sit or lie down and breathe deeply.
Exercise strengthens your heart and lungs and prepares them for the hard work
of labour, but it's beneficial only if done in moderation. Check your heart
rate when you exercise to make sure it doesn't exceed the safe level of
approximately 140 beats per minute.

Be careful: Oral sex is safe during pregnancy, but be sure your partner
doesn't blow air into your vagina; that could push an air bubble into your
bloodstream, putting you and the baby in danger.

Tip: Don't just put up with the pain of haemorrhoids, which are common for
women in the third trimester. Apply cold compresses or cotton balls soaked in
witch hazel to the area for quick relief.

Week 33

Baby: Your baby is now about 3½ pounds (1.59 kg) and is gaining as much as
eight ounces (227 g) a week. It continues to gain weight, the arms and legs
perfectly proportioned to the rest of its body. It measures between 15 and 16
inches (38cm – 40.6mm) and has little room to wiggle, but is still quite
active.

You: You're putting on a pound a week now, (nearly ½ kilo) but eating isn't as
enjoyable as it once was. After all, your growing baby is pressing up against
your stomach, hampering digestion and exacerbating heartburn.

Health: Heartburn can become a problem in the third trimester, as the baby
takes up more room. Avoid spicy, greasy, and acidic foods. Eating frequent
small meals may also help.

This pelvic tilt exercise can ease back pain and sciatica (tingling sensations
or sharp pains that run from the buttocks down the thighs). While kneeling on
all fours with your back straight, gently rock your pelvis back and forth.
Curve the centre of your back upward like a cat while contracting your
abdominals. Then lower until your back is straight again. Repeat ten times.

Be careful: Increase your servings of fibre-filled fruits and vegetables.
Fibre-rich foods, such as prunes, apricots, plums, beans, and peas, will help
you avoid constipation. If it becomes a problem, try adding psyllium, a
natural, bran like stool-softener available at health food stores, to your
meals. A fibre-rich diet only works if you drink more liquids, so aim for at
least eight glasses of fluids, preferably water, each day.

Week 34

Baby: By the end of this week, your baby may weigh as much as 4 pounds (1.82
kg) and measure 16 inches (406mm). As the uterine and abdominal walls stretch
and thin, more light reaches the womb, causing baby to open and close its eyes
in response. It also helps baby know day from night so it can cycle between
activity and rest.

You: In two weeks you will be asked to start coming in each week until you
deliver. Your doctor will keep an eye on your blood pressure to make sure it's
not abnormally high, which may affect the placenta's ability to deliver blood
and nutrients to the foetus. Also, your pelvic area may feel numb with
tingling brought on by pressure from the growing baby.

Health: In the coming weeks, you will be screened for the Group B
streptococcus (GBS) virus. If passed on to the baby, GBS can cause meningitis,
pneumonia, or worse. Experts say one in four pregnant women is a carrier, but
there's good news: GBS is easily treatable, requiring only that you be given
antibiotics during delivery.

Try this simple exercise to prepare for labour: Sit cross-legged on the floor
or in a chair. Line your shoulders up with your hips and place one hand on
your belly and the other hand on your back, just above your waist. Take a deep
breath, expanding the belly as you inhale (a "belly breath"). Exhale while
contracting your abs to pull your belly button in. Squeeze and hold, then
release (but don't go all the way back to the expanded position). Repeat. Each
squeeze-and-release counts as one contraction, so aim to do 25, five times a
day.

Tip: Pack your hospital bag with some reminders of home. Consider taking along
a T-shirt to wear during labour (instead of the standard-issue hospital gown),
a headband or ponytail holder to keep your hair off your face, and some extra
things to make you more comfortable after delivery.

Week 35

Baby: There's an excellent chance that your baby will have no complications if
born at 35 weeks or later. It is 5 pounds (just over 2.5 kg) now and is nearly
18 inches (45.7cm) long. The skull is still fairly soft and isn't yet
completely fused so baby can squeeze through the birth canal.

You: Ever noticed a few drops of clear or yellowish fluid on your nipples?
Your breasts have been preparing to make milk since the fifth or sixth month
of pregnancy. This "early milk," called colostrum, is loaded with your
system's antibodies and is the perfect food for your baby during its first few
days. Next comes first milk, which is creamy and white in colour. This arrives
two or three days after delivery, when stimulation from your baby nursing
sends a signal to your brain to produce prolactin, which affects the mammary
glands.

Health: Approximately 10 percent of pregnant women suffer from the blues,
which increases your risk of developing postpartum depression. The good news:
Relief may be a prescription away; some antidepressants are safe to use during
pregnancy. Yoga, meditation, and other relaxation techniques may also help you
shake off the blues.

If fatigue is setting in, cut back on weekly exercise. Three times a week
should be sufficient, or reduce the amount of time you work out (from ½ hour
to 15 minutes, for example). Most of all, be sure to take more frequent breaks
now and stay hydrated.

Tip: If you want to stick to the basics for baby outfits, here's all you'll
need: four to six undershirts or bodysuits that fasten between the legs, four
to six nightgowns or stretch suits, four to six all in ones or pairs of pants
and tops, one to two blanket sleep suits, a few sweaters, a couple of hats, a
pair of booties, three pairs of socks, and a snowsuit if you're delivering in
winter.

Week 36

Baby: Your baby weighs approximately 5 pounds (2.27 kg) and its full length is
about 18 inches (45.7cm). Baby continues to put on fat, which will keep it
warm and help regulate body temperature when it is born.

You: This last month of pregnancy is a dress rehearsal for the big event.
You'll lose your mucous plug, a protective barrier that's been present in your
cervix throughout the pregnancy, and your cervix will soften and maybe even
dilate. Although both are signs that early labour is under way, don't rush off
to the hospital or birthing centre just yet, you may be weeks away from the
actual birth.

Health: If varicose veins are running up and down your legs, seek some support
- support hose that is. It also helps to avoid crossing your legs and standing
up for too long.

If it's becoming more difficult for you to go to the gym, stay home and
stretch. Sit on the floor with your left leg out to the side, your right leg
bent. Raise your right arm over your head as if reaching to the sky, and make
a big arc as you lean over your left leg and try to touch your left foot.
Bring your arm back to the original position and repeat on the other side.

Be careful: Before you dive into a pre-baby cleaning frenzy, read the labels
on all chemicals and cleansers to make sure they're safe. Wear rubber gloves
when handling liquid cleansers, and work in a well-ventilated room to reduce
exposure to fumes.

Tip: Consider buying or renting a breast pump before you give birth so you
have it handy in case you need it after the delivery. Ask a lactation
consultant for a good recommendation.

Week 37

Baby: At over 18 inches (45.7cm) long, your baby is doing well. It is learning
what it's like to breathe, inhaling and exhaling amniotic fluid to perfect its
skills. Baby can also suck its thumb, turn its head, swallow, blink, and
grasp.

You: Sleep is elusive, the extra weight is slowing you down, and when you walk
it feels as if the baby is about to drop out (don't worry - it won't). As the
due date approaches, your doctor or midwife will check to see if your cervix
has begun to thin out and dilate. She'll also want to know how far the baby
has descended.

Health: MRI scans of pregnant women show that brain size actually shrinks in
the third trimester which may explain why you're sometimes so forgetful.
Thankfully, it returns to normal a few months after birth. No one knows just
what turns your mind to mush, but sleep deprivation may have something to do
with it. To compensate, jot everything down (including your daily tasks) and
leave written reminders everywhere.

You deserve a reward for sticking to a fitness regime throughout your
pregnancy, especially well into the third trimester. After putting in your
time at the gym this week, reward yourself with a movie or a good book. Or
skip it altogether and pamper yourself with a manicure or a massage.

Tip: Ask your health care provider how you can tell labour has truly begun and
when you should call her. If you have any unanswered questions, such as when
she'll get there and what will happen if she's not on call, now's the time to
clarify those details.

Week 38

Baby: Your pregnancy has reached full-term, which basically falls anywhere
between weeks 38 and 42; your due date is simply the midpoint of this time
period. Baby is between 5 and 9 pounds (2.27 and 4.08 kg) now, and all the
organ systems are in place. It has shed most of its lanugo and greasy vernix
coating, both of which baby will actually ingest, along with some amniotic
fluid; its body will turn this strange concoction into a dark, tarry stool
called meconium. The lungs and vocal chords are ready to start crying. As
he/she becomes more crowded, you may feel less movement. It’s time to meet
face-to-face.

You: You may literally breathe easier these days if the baby's head has
gradually dropped into position and shifted into the birth canal, giving your
organs some room. This is called lightening, and it may happen a few weeks
before labour begins, right before, or even during labour. Now that the baby's
shifted downward, you may feel greater pressure on your groin, thighs, and
bladder.

Health: Learn to spot false labour by knowing its signs: Your contractions
follow no discernible pattern and don't become longer, stronger, or closer
together. (Changing positions, say, getting up if you've been lying down,
should make the pain go away.) Also, in a false alarm, you'll feel the
contractions in the front of your body; in true labour, they begin in the back
and migrate toward the front.

Rest up. During these last few weeks, when just getting out of bed feels like
a chore, it's understandable if you want to forget the workouts altogether.
Instead of worrying about going to the gym, take this time to relax and
recharge. You need to save your energy for childbirth.

Tip: Make a list of all the important phone numbers you'll need once you bring
the baby home. Place the list right next to your phone, and be sure to include
anyone you think would be a great resource for you during those early weeks
(the paediatrician, birthing partner, and lactation consultant). Collect menus
from restaurants that deliver; this way, if you and your partner are too busy
to cook, a nutritious meal is just a call away.

Week 39

Baby: Your baby is in the homestretch: As it gains weight and grows to
approximately 20 inches (50.8cm), it has little room to manoeuvre. It may
already be in position for delivery, the head cradled in the pelvic cavity.
The brain is one of the last organs to fully develop, and it's almost there,
its neurons firing away.

You: Right now, hovering near the top of your list of worries may be what
labour’s really like. Here's what to expect: The early phase of labour can
take days or even weeks, during which the cervix softens and dilates to three
centimetres. The contractions are fleeting, lasting 30 to 45 seconds. When
active labour kicks in, your contractions will become more powerful and more
frequent and will persist for 60 seconds. Your cervix will dilate to just
approximately 7cms (2.75 ins), and you'll have a harder time catching your
breath between contractions. The transitional phase is next, with contractions
arriving one on top of another and going for as long as 90 seconds. In a
little over an hour, your cervix will dilate to 10cms (nearly 4 ins), at which
point you'll be ready to push.

Health: To make sure your nipples protrude enough for a baby to latch on
during breastfeeding, take your finger and thumb and place them above and
below the areola; gently press down toward the wall of the chest. (Don't
squeeze your thumb and finger together - it may cause the nipple to invert.)
The nipple should pop out. If it turns inward, ask your doctor or midwife for
recommendations on how to prepare your nipples for nursing.

Now that you're not working out as hard or as often, use the time to do a few
relaxation exercises. Studies show that they lower your heart rate and blood
pressure and put you in a great mood. Don't know how to get started? Try this
simple exercise: Lie down on your side and breathe deeply. Isolate individual
muscle groups, tense them, and release as you exhale.

Tip: Your to-do list runs long, but be sure to enjoy your last few weeks of
pregnancy. Caring for a new-born is exciting and deeply rewarding, but it
doesn't leave you much time to yourself. Make the most of your solitude now to
indulge in such pleasures as reading for hours and watching films.

Week 40

Baby: When your baby finally arrives, it will weigh between 6 and 9 pounds
(2.72 and 4.08 kg)and measure about 20 inches (50.8cm). If you deliver
vaginally, the head may be shaped like a cone after travelling through the
narrow birth canal, and baby will emerge covered in blood and amniotic fluid.
The eyes will be puffy, and it will only be able to see a blurred version of
you, as it can only focus about an inch away. But the sound of your voice,
which baby has become used to while inside the womb, will be music to its
ears.

You: Expect to push even after your baby's out; you'll have to deliver the
placenta, a comparatively easy feat compared to hard labour. You may be
overwhelmed by contradictory feelings, too, but after such adventure, laughter
and tears are both appropriate.

Health: Expect your baby to be whisked away soon after birth, but not for any
worrying reason. Baby is just taking the first test: the Apgar. Administered
at one minute after birth and again at 5 minutes, it rates your new-born’s
heart rate, respiration, muscle tone, reflexes, and colour. Plus, nurses will
apply antibiotics to the eyes to protect them from germs in the birth canal.
They'll also administer the first shots: a vitamin K injection to encourage
normal blood clotting and the hepatitis B vaccine to prevent liver infection.

If you're feeling restless and cooped-up at home, take a slow stroll around
your neighbourhood to clear your head and keep your body moving. Some women
claim walking brings on contractions; no one knows for certain if it works,
but it can't hurt to go outdoors.

Tip: If you're tiring of the wait, try road-testing a few folk remedies, with
the midwife's approval, of course. Many women claim that taking brisk walks,
having lots of sex (the prostaglandin in semen apparently softens the cervix),
and drinking raspberry leaf tea will help bring on contractions.

NB Please remember that the midwifery system for delivering babies varies from
place to place, and country to country, so you may or may not experience all
the services that are listed above.

•••

Freya

First time use

Tips & tricks

Menstrual cycle

Pregnancy

Blog

CircleTime

Time Tracker

Reviews

Round calendar

Mayan calendar

Moon calendar

Graphics

Hologram calendar

Instructions

Free calendar 2018

Planting calendar

About us

Contact us

privacy policy

Up

 Get Freya for free

![](images/blank.gif?crc=4208392903)

Pregnancy

Tips & tricks

Manual

Pregnancy week by week

•••

First time with freya?

Menstrual Cycle

Tips & tricks

•••

Blog

•••

Free printable calendar 2018

Maria Thun biodynamic planting calendar

•••

Contact us

•••

Privacy

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

