
>

>> Skip to main content

>>

>> # Union of Concerned Scientists

>>

>> # ![Union of Concerned

>>

>>
Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-
ucs.png)

>>

>> en español __

>>

>> ## Search form

>>

>> Search

>>

>> ## Main Menu

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Our Work

>>  
>>                                     * Clean Energy

>>  
>>                                     * Clean Vehicles

>>  
>>                                     * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                                     * Global Warming

>>  
>>                                     * Nuclear Power

>>  
>>                                     * Nuclear Weapons

>>  
>>                                     * Center for Science and Democracy

>>  
>>                                   * About

>>  
>>                                     * Accomplishments & History

>>  
>>                                     * Leadership & Experts

>>  
>>                                     * Funding & Financials

>>  
>>                                     * Ways to Give

>>  
>>                                     * News Center

>>  
>>                                     * Jobs at UCS

>>  
>>                                     * Contact Us

>>  
>>                                     * The UCS Store: Say It With Science!

>>  
>>                                   * Take Action

>>  
>>                                     * Science Network

>>  
>>                                   * Subscribe

>>  
>>                                   * Donate

>>  
>>                                     * Renew Your Membership

>>  
>>                                     * Become a Member

>>  
>>                                     * Give Monthly

>>  
>>                                     * Make a Planned Gift

>>  
>>                                     * More Ways to Give

>>  
>>                                     * Gifts in Honor or Memory

>>  
>>                                     * Gift Memberships

>>  
>>                                   * Science Network Leaders

>>  
>>

>> **search**

>>

>> ## You are here

>>  
>>                         >>                                   1. Center for
Science and Democracy

>>  
>>                                   2. » Promoting Scientific Integrity

>>  
>>

>> # Climate Change Research Distorted and Suppressed

>>

>> _NOTE: The following is one ofa series of case studies produced by the
Union of Concerned Scientists' Scientific Integrity Program between 2004 and
2010 to document the abuses highlighted in our 2004 report, _Scientific
Integrity in Policy Making.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Jump to the June 2005 update

>>

>> The George W. Bush administration consistently sought to undermine the
public’s understanding of the view held by the vast majority of climate
scientists that human-caused emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-
trapping gases are making a discernible contribution to global warming.1

>>

>> After coming to office, the administration asked the National Academy of
Sciences (NAS) to review the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) and provide further assessment of what climate science
could say about this issue.2 The NAS panel rendered a strong opinion, which,
in essence, confirmed that of the IPCC. The American Geophysical Union, the
world’s largest organization of earth scientists, has also released a strong
statement describing human-caused disruptions of Earth’s climate.3 Yet even in
the face of this overwhelming scientific concensus, Bush administration
spokespersons continued to contend that the uncertainties in climate
projections and fossil fuel emissions are too great to warrant mandatory
action to slow emissions.4

>>

>> In May 2002, President Bush expressed disdain for a State Department
report5 to the United Nations that pointed to a clear human role in the
accumulation of heat-trapping gases and detailed the likely negative
consequences of climate change; the president called it “a report put out by
the bureaucracy.”6 In September 2002, the administration removed a section on
climate change from the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) annual air
pollution report,7 even though the climate issue had been discussed in the
report in each of the preceding five years.

>>

>> Then, in one well-documented case, the Bush administration blatantly
tampered with the integrity of scientific analysis at a federal agency when,
in June 2003, the White House tried to make a series of changes to the EPA’s
draft Report on the Environment.8 A front-page article in the New York Times
broke the news that White House officials tried to force the EPA to
substantially alter the report’s section on climate change. The EPA report,
which referenced the NAS review and other studies, stated that human activity
is contributing significantly to climate change.9

>>

>> Interviews with current and former EPA staff, as well as an internal EPA
memo reviewed for this report, revealed that the White House Council on
Environmental Quality and the Office of Management and Budget demanded major
amendments including:

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * The deletion
of a temperature record covering 1,000 years in

>>  
>>

>> order to, according to the EPA memo, emphasize “a recent, limited analysis
[that] supports the administration’s favored message.”10

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * The removal
of any reference to the NAS review—requested by

>>  
>>

>> the White House itself—that confirmed human activity is contributing to
climate change.11

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * The
insertion of a reference to a discredited study of

>>  
>>

>> temperature records funded in part by the American Petroleum Institute.12

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * The
elimination of the summary statement—noncontroversial

>>  
>>

>> within the science community that studies climate change—that “climate
change has global consequences for human health and the environment.”13

>>

>> According to the internal EPA memo, White House officials demanded so many
qualifying words such as “potentially” and “may” that the result would have
been to insert “uncertainty...where there is essentially none.”14

>>

>> In a political environment described by now-departed EPA Administrator
Christine Todd Whitman as “brutal,”15 the entire section on climate change was
ultimately deleted from the version released for public comment.16 According
to internal EPA documents and interviews with EPA researchers, the agency
staff chose this path rather than compromising their credibility by
misrepresenting the scientific consensus.17 Doing otherwise, as one current,
high-ranking EPA official puts it, would “poorly represent the science and
ultimately undermine the credibility of the EPA and the White House.”18

>>

>> The EPA’s decision to delete any mention of global warming from its report
drew widespread criticism. Many scientists and public officials— Republicans
and Democrats alike—were moved to decry the administration’s political
manipulation in this case.

>>

>> Notably, the incident drew the ire of Russell Train, who served as EPA
administrator under Presidents Nixon and Ford. In a letter to the New York
Times, Train stated that the Bush administration’s actions undermined the
independence of the EPA and were virtually unprecedented for the degree of
their political manipulation of the agency’s research. As Train put it, the
“interest of the American people lies in having full disclosures of the
facts.”19 Train also noted that, “In all my time at the EPA, I don’t recall
any regulatory decision that was driven by political considerations. More to
the present point, never once, to my best recollection, did either the Nixon
or Ford White House ever try to tell me how to make a decision.”20

>>

>> Were the case an isolated incident, it could perhaps be dismissed as an
anomaly. On the contrary, the Bush administration repeatedly intervened to
distort or suppress climate change research findings despite promises by the
president that, “my Administration’s climate change policy will be science-
based.”21

>>

>> Despite the widespread agreement in the scientific community that human
activity is contributing to global climate change, as demonstrated by the
consensus of international experts on the IPCC, the Bush administration sought
to exaggerate uncertainty by relying on disreputable and fringe science
reports and preventing informed discussion on the issue. As one current EPA
scientist puts it, the Bush administration often “does not even invite the EPA
into the discussion” on climate change issues.

>>

>> “This administration seems to want to make environmental policy at the
White House,” the government scientist explained. “I suppose that is their
right. But one has to ask: on the basis of what information is this policy
being promulgated? What views are being represented? Who is involved in the
decision making? What kind of credible expertise is being brought to bear?”22

>>

>> Dr. Rosina Bierbaum, a Clinton administration appointee to the Office of
Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) who also served during the first year of
the Bush administration, offers a disturbing window on the process. From the
start, Bierbaum contends, “The scientists [who] knew the most about climate
change at OSTP were not allowed to participate in deliberations on the issue
within the White House inner circle.” 23

>>

>> Through such consistent tactics, the Bush administration not only distorted
scientific and technical analysis on global climate change and suppressed the
dissemination of research results, but avoided fashioning any policies that
would significantly reduce the threat implied by those findings.

>>

>> In the course of this investigation, UCS learned of the extent to which
these policies seem to extend. In one case that has yet to surface in the
press, the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA) sought in September 2003 to reprint a popular
informational brochure about carbon sequestration in the soil and what farmers
could do to reduce emissions of heat trapping gases. According to one current
government official familiar with the incident, the brochure was widely viewed
as one of the agency’s successful efforts in the climate change field. The
NRCS had already distributed some 325,000 of the brochures and sought a modest
update, as well as proposing a Spanish edition.24

>>

>> Notably, even this relatively routine proposal was passed to the White
House Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) for review. William Hohenstein,
director of the Global Change Program Exchange in the office of the chief
economist at the USDA, acknowledged that he passed the request on to the CEQ,
as he says he would “for any documents relating to climate change policy.”25
While Hohenstein denies that he was explicitly ordered to do so, he says he
knows the White House was concerned “that things regarding climate change be
put out by the government in a neutral way.”26

>>

>> As a result of CEQ’s objections about the brochure, staff at the NRCS
dropped their proposal for a reprint.27 “It is not just a case of
micromanagement, but really of censorship of government information,” a
current government official familiar with the case noted. “In nearly 15 years
of government service, I can’t remember ever needing clearance from the White
House for such a thing.”28

>>

>> **June 2005 Update**

>>

>> In March 2005 whistleblower Rick Piltz, a senior associate from the
government office that coordinates federal climate change programs (now known
as the Climate Change Science Program) resigned because he did not want "to
sacrifice the ability to speak freely."29 Piltz declared that political
appointees were working "to impede forthright communication of the state of
climate science" and tried to "undermine the credibility and integrity of the
program."30

>>

>> The Government Accountability Project (GAP), a non-profit, public interest
organization and law firm, is now representing Piltz. In June 2005, GAP gave
the _New York Times_ internal documents from Piltz’s office showing
handwritten edits on several 2002 and 2003 scientific climate change reports.
The edits increased and at times overstated the level of uncertainty
associated with climate science. According to the _New York Times_ , the edits
tended "to produce an air of doubt about findings that most climate experts
say are robust."31

>>

>> The edits were made by Philip A. Cooney, then chief of staff of the White
House Council on Environmental Quality, who formerly worked for the American
Petroleum Institute and led the oil industry’s drive to prevent restrictions
on greenhouse gas emissions.32 Mr. Cooney is a lawyer with no scientific
training.

>>

>> In one example, Cooney edited an October 2002 draft of a regularly
published summary of government climate research, called "Our Changing
Planet," by inserting the word "extremely" into the sentence: "The attribution
of the causes of biological and ecological changes to climate change or
variability is extremely difficult." In another instance, Cooney deleted a
paragraph that projected reductions of mountain glaciers and snowpacks in a
report examining the impact of global warming on water availability and
flooding. In the margins he wrote that this was "straying from research
strategy into speculative findings/musings."

>>

>> _The New York Times_ story appeared around the same time that British Prime
Minister Tony Blair met with President Bush to urge the united States to take
a stronger role in combating global warming. To bolster Blair’s argument,
scientific academies in 11 countries including the United States released a
joint letter stating, "The scientific understanding of climate change is now
sufficiently clear to justify nations taking prompt action."

>>

>> Despite the scientific academies' statement, at the June 8th daily White
House press briefing spokesman Scott McClellan rebuffed accusations that the
Bush administration actively sought to highlight the uncertainties involved in
climate change science and downplay the link between the emission of heat-
trapping gases and global climate change. The White House maintained that it
is a normal procedure for political appointees to edit scientific documents.33

>>

>> Two days after the original documents with Cooney’s edits were released,
Cooney resigned.34 Just days later, Exxon Mobil Corporation announced that the
company had hired Cooney for an unspecified position. The chairman of Exxon
Mobil, Lee Raymond, has been an outspoken opponent of efforts to curb global
warming. According to the Associated Press, Raymond has "come out strongly
against the Kyoto Protocol and has repeatedly questioned the science behind
climate change."35

>>

>> Senate minority leader Harry Reid (D-NV) and Senator Frank Lautenberg
(D-NJ) both called for an investigation by the Government Accountability
Office into whether Cooney "violated laws on falsification of documents and
obstruction of Congress" in revising the climate reports.36

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> 1\. This page is a modified excerpt from the 2004 UCS report _Scientific
Integrity in Policymaking_.

>>

>> 2\. National Academy of Sciences, Commission on Geosciences, Environment
and Resources, Climate Change Science: An Analysis of Some Key Questions,
2001. Online at www.nap.edu/books/0309075742/html.

>>

>> 3\. See www.agu.org/sci_soc/policy/climate_change_position.html.

>>

>> 4\. P. Dobriansky, “Only New Technology Can Halt Climate Change,” Financial
Times, December 1, 2003.

>>

>> 5\. US Climate Action Report, Department of State, May 2002.

>>

>> 6\. K.Q. Seelye, “President Distances Himself from Global Warming Report,”
New York Times, June 5, 2002.

>>

>> 7\. See www.epa.gov/airtrends.

>>

>> 8\. “Report on the Environment,” U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, June
23, 2003.

>>

>> 9\. A.C. Revkin and K.Q. Seelye, “Report by EPA Leaves Out Data on Climate
Change,” New York Times, June 19, 2003.

>>

>> 10\. EPA internal memo, April 29, 2003. (See Appendix A.)

>>

>> 11\. Ibid. Deleted reference: National Academy of Sciences, Commission on
Geosciences, Environment and Resources, Climate Change Science: An Analysis of
Some Key Questions, 2001.

>>

>> 12\. Revkin and Seelye, New York Times. Discredited study: W. Soon and S.
Baliunas. 2003. Proxy climatic and environmental changes of the past 1000
years. Climate Research 23(2):89-110. Study discrediting it: Michael Mann et
al. 2003. On past temperatures and anomalous late 20th century warmth. h Eos
84(27):256-257. s

>>

>> 13\. EPA internal memo.

>>

>> 14\. Ibid.

>>

>> 15\. NOW with Bill Moyers transcript, September 19, 2003.

>>

>> 16\. Revkin and Seelye, New York Times.

>>

>> 17\. Author interviews with current EPA staff members. Names withheld on
request. See also “option paper” in EPA internal memo, Appendix A.

>>

>> 18\. Author interview with EPA staff member, name withheld on request,
January 2004. EPA internal memo.

>>

>> 19\. Russell E. Train, “When Politics Trumps Science” (letter to the
editor), New York Times, June 21, 2003.

>>

>> 20\. Russell E. Train, “The Environmental Protection Agency just isn’t like
it was in the good old (Nixon) days,” www.gristmagazine.com, September 22,
2003.

>>

>> 21\. White House, President’s Statement on Climate Change (July 13, 2001).
Online at www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2001/07/20010713-2.html.

>>

>> 22\. Author interview with EPA scientist, name withheld on request, January
2004.

>>

>> 23\. As quoted in N. Thompson, “Science friction: The growing—and
dangerous—divide between scientists and the GOP,” Washington Monthly,
July/August 2003.

>>

>> 24\. Author interview with USDA official, name withheld on request, January
2004.

>>

>> 25\. Author interview with William Hohenstein, USDA, January 2004.

>>

>> 26\. Ibid.

>>

>> 27\. Ibid.

>>

>> 28\. Author interview with USDA official, name withheld on request, January
2004.

>>

>> 29\. Torcuil Crichton, “White House Official Resigns After Climate
Documents Flap,” _Agence France Presse_ , June 12, 2005.

>>

>> 30\. Ibid.

>>

>> 31\. A.C. Revkin, “Bush Aide Softened Greenhouse Gas Links to Global
Warming,” _New York Times_ , June 8, 2005.

>>

>> 32\. Ibid.

>>

>> 33\. McClellan, Scott, White House Press Briefing, June 8, 2005. See
http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2005/06/20050608-2.html

>>

>> 34\. A.C. Revkin, “Editor of Climate Reports Resigns,” _New York Times_ ,
June 10, 2005.

>>

>> 35\. “White House Official to Join Fuel Co,” _Associated Press_ , June 14,
2005.

>>

>> 36\. "Senators Seek Inquiry," National Briefing, _New York Times_ , June
30, 2005.

>>

>> ## We Need Your Support

>>

>> to Make Change Happen

>>

>> We _can_ ensure that decisions about our health, safety, and environment
are based on the best available science—but not without you. Your generous
support helps develop science-based solutions for a healthy, safe, and
sustainable future.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * $25

>>  
>>                                   * $50

>>  
>>                                   * $100

>>  
>>                                   * $250

>>  
>>                                   * $1000

>>  
>>                                   * Other

>>  
>>

>> Donate

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * $25

>>  
>>                                   * $50

>>  
>>                                   * $100

>>  
>>                                   * $250

>>  
>>                                   * $1000

>>  
>>                                   * Other

>>  
>>

>> Donate

>>

>> ## Share

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * __

>>  
>>                                   * __

>>  
>>                                   * __

>>  
>>

>> ## From our blog

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Bury Myers’
NOAA Nomination Dr. Jane Willenbring, Associate

>>  
>>

>> Professor at the Institution of Oceanography; Dr. Amy Freitag is a contract
social scientistJune 6, 2019

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Wheeler’s
Breathtaking Ignorance of Science, in One Comment

>>  
>>

>> Gretchen GoldmanJune 6, 2019

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
Understanding the New Restrictions on Fetal Tissue Research,

>>  
>>

>> and Attacks on the Scientists Who Use It Michael HalpernJune 5, 2019

>>

>> More

>>

>> ## On Twitter

>>

>> Tweets by @UCSUSA

>>

>> ## Take Action

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *

>>  
>>

>>
![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_default/public/images/promos/2018/02/GORT-

StandUpForScience.jpg?itok=lYos4-HG)

>>

>> Write your member of Congress to support strong congressional oversight of
agencies important to your community's health and safety.

>>

>> Tell Congress to hold the Trump administration accountable. >

>>

>> We use cookies so that you will have the best possible experience on our
website. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies for site
features. Learn more in our privacy policy.

>>

>> I Accept

>>

>> ![Untion of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-

ucs.png)

>>

>> ## Science for a healthy planet and safer world

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * __

>>  
>>                                   * __

>>  
>>                                   * __

>>  
>>                                   * __

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * About Us

>>  
>>                                     * UCS Leadership & Experts

>>  
>>                                     * Funding & Financials

>>  
>>                                     * History & Accomplishments

>>  
>>                                     * Jobs & Internships

>>  
>>                                     * News

>>  
>>                                   * Issues

>>  
>>                                     * Clean Energy

>>  
>>                                     * Clean Vehicles

>>  
>>                                     * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                                     * Global Warming

>>  
>>                                     * Nuclear Power

>>  
>>                                     * Nuclear Weapons

>>  
>>                                   * Our Podcast

>>  
>>                                     * Got Science?

>>  
>>                                   * Publications

>>  
>>                                   * Reports & Analysis

>>  
>>                                   * Center for Science and Democracy

>>  
>>                                   * Action Center

>>  
>>                                   * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                                   * State Disclosures

>>  
>>                                   * Our Blogs

>>  
>>                                     * The Equation

>>  
>>                                     * All Things Nuclear

>>  
>>                                   * Site Map

>>  
>>                                   * Contact Us

>>  
>>                                   * UCS Store

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * Ways to Give

>>  
>>                                     * Donate

>>  
>>                                     * Give Monthly

>>  
>>                                     * Planned Gifts

>>  
>>                                   * How to Help

>>  
>>                                     * Become a Member

>>  
>>                                     * Take Action

>>  
>>                                     * Subscribe

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * A **Normal Font Size**

>>  
>>                                   * A **Larger Font Size**

>>  
>>                                   * A **Largest Font Size**

>>  
>>

>> **Union of Concerned Scientists**  
>  2 Brattle Square, Cambridge MA 02138-3780

>>

>> (C) Union of Concerned Scientists  
>  UCS is a 501c(3) organization

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

