
>

>> Open main menu

>>

>> ![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

>>

>> Search

>>

>> # Regulation of greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Read in
another language

>>  
>>                                   * Watch this page

>>  
>>                                   * Edit

>>  
>>

>> Parts of this article (those related to two June 2014 Supreme Court
decisions) need to be **updated**. Please update this article to reflect
recent events or newly available information. _( November 2014)_

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> See also: Clean Power Plan

>>

>> The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) began regulating
greenhouse gases (GHGs) under the Clean Air Act ("CAA" or "Act") from mobile
and stationary sources of air pollution for the first time on January 2, 2011.
Standards for mobile sources have been established pursuant to Section 202 of
the CAA, and GHGs from stationary sources are currently controlled under the
authority of Part C of Title I of the Act. The basis for regulations was
upheld in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia in
June 2012.[1][2]

>>

>> ## Contents

>>

>> ##

>>

>> Historical contextEdit

>>

>> Section 202(a)(1) of the CAA requires the Administrator of the EPA to
establish standards "applicable to the emission of any _air pollutant_
from…new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines, which in [her] judgment
_cause, or contribute_ to, air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated
to _endanger_ public health or welfare" (emphasis added).[3] On October 20,
1999, the International Center for Technology Assessment (ICTA) and several
other parties (petitioners) petitioned the EPA to regulate greenhouse gases
from new motor vehicles under the Act.[4] The petitioners argued that carbon
dioxide (CO 2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and hydrofluorocarbons
meet the definition of an _air pollutant_ under section 302(g) of the Act, and
that statements made by the EPA, other federal agencies, and the United
Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) amounted to a finding
that these pollutants are reasonably anticipated to endanger public health and
welfare. Based on these factors, the petitioners asserted that EPA had a
mandatory duty to regulate greenhouse gases under section 202 of the Act, and
asked the agency to carry out that duty.[4]

>>

>> On September 8, 2003, EPA denied the ICTA petition on the ground that it
did not have authority under the CAA to promulgate regulations to address
global climate change and that CO2 and other GHGs therefore could not be
considered _air pollutants_ under the provisions of the CAA, including section
202.[5] The agency further stated that even if it had the authority to
regulate GHGs from motor vehicles, it would decline to do so as a matter of
policy. The agency maintained that regulating motor vehicle GHG emissions
would neither address the global problem effectively, nor be consistent with
President Bush's policies for addressing climate change, which centered on
non- regulatory efforts such as voluntary reductions in GHGs, public-private
partnerships aimed at reducing the economy's reliance on fossil fuels, and
research to probe into scientific uncertainties regarding climate change.[6]
The agency's action on the ICTA petition set the stage for a prolonged legal
battle, which was eventually argued before the Supreme Court on November 29,
2006.

>>

>> In a 5-4 decision in _Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency_ ,
the Supreme Court held that "greenhouse gases fit well within the Act's
capacious definition of 'air pollutant' " and that EPA therefore has statutory
authority to regulate GHG emissions from new motor vehicles.[7] The court
further ruled that "policy judgments have nothing to do with whether
greenhouse gas emissions contribute to climate change and do not amount to a
reasoned justification for declining to form a scientific judgment." In EPA's
view, this required the agency to make a positive or negative endangerment
finding under Section 202(a) of the CAA.[8]

>>

>> ##

>>

>> TimelineEdit

>>

>> Actions taken by the EPA to regulate greenhouse gases, and steps planned to
complete emissions rules[9] Date | Action Taken | Relevant Literature  
>  \---|---|---  
>  April 2007 | The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Massachusetts v. EPA that GHGs
are air pollutants covered by the Clean Air Act. The EPA may regulate GHGs if
they are determined to be a danger to human health. | Supreme Court Case  
>  May 2007 | President George W. Bush orders EPA to use its authority under
the Clean Air Act to regulate GHGs from mobile sources, working in
coordination with several other federal agencies. | Executive Order 13432  
>  December 2009 | EPA issued its "Endangerment Finding," which found that
current and projected levels of six GHGs threaten the health and human welfare
of current and future generations. | EPA Endangerment Finding  
>  May 2010 | EPA issued its "Tailoring Rule," which limited air permitting
guidelines to the largest stationary sources of GHGs, excluding smaller
factories, restaurants and farms. | EPA Tailoring Rule  
>  December 2010 | EPA issued guidance to states on implementing the new GHG
guidelines. | EPA Fact Sheet  
>  January 2011 | New GHG air permitting began for facilities that would have
to go through air permitting for non-GHG pollutants anyway. | EPA GHG
Permitting Fact Sheet  
>  January 2011 | EPA proposed a three-year deferral of GHG permitting for
facilities that use biomass. | EPA Press Release  
>  July 2011 | New GHG permitting began for new facilities that would emit
more than 100,000 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per year and for
facilities that will undergo major modification that would increase emissions
by 75,000 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent per year | EPA Tailoring Rule Fact
Sheet  
>  July 2011 | EPA finalized a three-year deferral of GHG permitting for
facilities that use biomass. | EPA Biogenic Fact Sheet  
>  September 2011 | EPA will[ _when?_ ] propose GHG guidelines under the "New
Source Performance Standards" (NSPS), which will establish emission levels for
new and existing power plants. | Power Plant Settlement Agreement  
>  December 2011 | EPA will[ _when?_ ] propose GHG NSPS standards for oil
refineries. | Oil Refinery Settlement Agreement  
>  March 2012 | EPA proposed carbon pollution standards for new power plants |
EPA Fact Sheet  
>  May 2012 | EPA will issue final GHG standards for powerplants. | EPA
Settlement Fact Sheet  
>  November 2012 | EPA will issue final GHG standards for oil refineries. |
Oil Refinery Settlement Agreement  
>  April 2015 | EPA will complete study to examine GHG permitting for smaller
sources of emissions. |

>>

>> ##

>>

>> Contributors to and consequences of climate changeEdit

>>

>> ### Physical and social contributors to climate changeEdit

>>  
>>                         >>                         _"Suddenly, combustion
of fossil fuels for transportation, power

>>  
>>

>> generation, industrial processes, and heating our homes has been abruptly
transformed from a great solution to a huge problem…. We have based our
cities, or businesses, and our lifestyle on the convenience and relatively low
cost of gasoline, coal-fired electricity, and plastic. It's no wonder that the
specter ofglobal warming appears so devastating: it threatens the roots of our
culture."_[10]

>>

>> While there is a general consensus among the scientific community that
anthropogenic GHG emissions are forcing changes in the global climate
system,[11][12] there is much less agreement about what should be done to
address the problem because both the causes and potential solutions involve
significant economic, political, and as Ingrid Kelley points out, social and
cultural issues. Addressing climate change has been, and will continue to be
particularly difficult for the United States because the U.S. was born during
the Industrial Revolution and its growth has been powered by fossil fuels.[10]
Coal, for example, was first commercially mined in the United States in 1748,
and within a few years after the ratification of the U.S. Constitution,
Pittsburgh became the first industrial center in the country to use coal-fired
steam power in its manufacturing operations. Electric generating plants first
used pulverized coal in 1918, and that same basic method of generation is
still in use today.[10] In 2009, coal was used to produce 45% of electricity
in the U.S.[13] and that proportion is projected to remain more or less
constant through 2035.[14] Largely because of the Country's reliance on coal,
electricity generation accounted for 34% of U.S. GHG emissions in 2007,
followed by transportation sources (28%) and other industrial sources (19%).
In 2005, the United States emitted 18% of the world's total GHG emissions,
making it the second largest emitter after China.[15] While the technology
that powers our "fossil fuel culture"[10] is part of the climate change
problem, and more sustainable technologies will undoubtedly be part of the
solution, another important factor in our efforts to stop climate change is
the "blindness" that our economic system exhibits toward environmental
degradation.[16]

>>

>> According to Al Gore, "[f]ree market capitalist economics is arguably the
most powerful tool used by civilization" but it is also, "the single most
powerful force behind what seem to be irrational decisions about the global
environment."[16] The force to which Gore refers draws strength from the fact
that environmental amenities such as clean air and other _public goods_ do not
have a price tag and are feely shared by everyone. The lack of price
mechanisms to signal the scarcity of such goods means there are no economic
incentives to conserve them. In what is known as the _tragedy of the commons_
, rational individuals are motivated to over-utilize these resources for
short-term economic gain despite the potential for collective action to
deplete the resource or result in other adverse consequences in the long
run.[17] What this means for GHGs is that their effects on climate stability
are often disregarded in economic analyses as _externalities_. As a frequently
used measure of a country's well being, the GDP, for example, places value on
the goods and services produced within a country but fails to account for the
GHG emissions and other environmental effects created in the process.[16][18]
Nations are thus incentivized to utilize their resources and promote
consumption at ever increasing rates despite the consequences of those actions
on atmospheric concentrations of GHGs and climate stability. In this respect,
the ongoing UN climate change negotiations are fundamentally about the
economic future of the nations involved.[19]

>>

>> ### Greenhouse gas effect on public health and welfareEdit

>>

>> On December 15, 2009, EPA Administrator Lisa P. Jackson made two important
findings under section 202(a) of the CAA:[20]

>>  
>>                         >>                                   1. that six
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere – CO2, CH4,

>>  
>>

>> N2O, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride – may
reasonably be anticipated to endanger both public health and public welfare;
and

>>  
>>                         >>                                   2. that GHG
emissions from mobile sources covered under CAA

>>  
>>

>> section 202(a) contribute to the total greenhouse gas air pollution, and
thus to the problem of climate change.

>>

>> In the Agency's view, the body of work produced by the IPCC, the U.S.
Global Change Research Program, and the National Research Council of the U.S.
National Academy of Sciences represents the most comprehensive, advanced, and
thoroughly reviewed documents on the science of climate change. Accordingly,
the Administrator relied primarily upon assessment reports and other
scientific documents produced by these entities in reaching her
conclusions.[21]

>>

>> The IPCC defines "climate change" as "a change in the state of the climate
that can be identified (e.g. using statistical tests) by changes in the mean
and/or the variability of its properties, and that persists for an extended
period, typically decades or longer. It refers to any change in climate over
time, whether due to natural variability or as a result of human
activity."[22] In its latest assessment on climate change, the IPCC found that
"warming of the climate system is unequivocal" and that the anthropogenic
component of this warming over the last thirty years has likely had a
discernible influence on observed changes in many physical and biological
systems.[22] The properties of greenhouse gases are such that they retain heat
in the atmosphere, which would otherwise escape to space. GHGs accumulate in
the atmosphere when they are emitted faster than they can be naturally
removed, and that accumulation prompts changes in the climate system. Once
emitted into the atmosphere, GHGs influence the Earth's energy balance for a
period of decades to centuries.[23] Consistent with their long-lasting
impacts, the IPCC found that even if the concentrations of all GHGs had been
kept constant at year 2000 levels, a further warming of approximately 0.1oC
per decade would be expected.[22] The fact that GHGs are long-lived in the
atmosphere also means that they become well mixed across the globe – hence the
global nature of the problem.[24]

>>

>> After considering the scientific evidence before her, Administrator Jackson
found that greenhouse gases could be reasonably anticipated to endanger the
health of the U.S. population in several ways. They are:[25]

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * _**Direct
temperature effects**_ – Heat is the leading cause

>>  
>>

>> of weather-related deaths in the U.S. and severe heat waves are projected
to intensify over the portions of the country where these events already
occur.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * _**Effects
on air quality**_ – Ground level ozone (the main

>>  
>>

>> component of smog) can induce chest pain, coughing, throat irritation, and
congestion, and it can exacerbate respiratory illnesses such as bronchitis,
emphysema, and asthma.[26] Elevated temperatures associated with climate
change are expected to intensify ground level ozone formation in polluted
areas of the U.S.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * _**Effects
on extreme weather events**_ – The IPCC reports

>>  
>>

>> evidence of an increase in intense tropical cyclone activity in the North
Atlantic since approximately 1970.[22] Increases in tropical cyclone intensity
are associated with increased death, injury, water- and food-borne disease,
and post-traumatic stress disorder.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * _**Effects
on climate-sensitive diseases**_ – Expected

>>  
>>

>> changes in the climate will likely increase the spread of food- and water-
borne pathogens among susceptible populations.

>>

>> Administrator Jackson also found that GHGs could be reasonably anticipated
to endanger public welfare in the following ways:[27]

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
_**Agriculture**_ – While higher atmospheric CO 2

>>  
>>

>> concentrations may stimulate plant growth, climatic changes may also
promote the spread of pests and weeds, increase ground level ozone formation
(which is detrimental to plant life), and change temperature and precipitation
patterns. Uncertainty remains about the extent to which these factors will
balance each other but the evidence suggests a net disbenefit, with the
potential for future crop failure.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
_**Forestry**_ – As with agriculture, uncertainties remain

>>  
>>

>> but there is evidence of an increase in the size and occurrence of
wildfires, insect outbreaks, and tree mortality in parts of the U.S. These
effects are expected to continue with future changes in climate.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * _**Water
resources**_ – The effects of climate change on the

>>  
>>

>> water cycle have already been observed. For example, there is "well-
documented evidence of shrinking snowpack due to warming" in the western U.S.
These changes in snowfall are likely to affect areas such as California that
rely on snowmelt for their water supply. Climate change is also expected to
impact the water supply in other areas of the country, increasing competition
for its use.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * _**Sea level
rise**_ – The greatest risk to the U.S.

>>  
>>

>> associated with sea level rise is the extent to which it will exacerbate
storm-surge flooding. Areas along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts including New
Orleans, Miami, and New York City are particularly vulnerable to such effects.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * _**Energy**_
– Climate change is expected to increase peak

>>  
>>

>> electricity demand. This may further constrain water resources as power
plants rely heavily on water for cooling. A large portion of U.S. energy
infrastructure is located in coastal areas and may be at risk to damage from
flooding.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
_**Ecosystems and wildlife**_ – Changes in habitat range,

>>  
>>

>> timing of migration, and reproductive behavior have already been observed
and are expected to increase with further warming. Ocean warming and
acidification are expected to impair marine species such as corals, and the
loss of arctic sea ice will reduce habitat for a number of species. Spruce-fir
forests are, "likely to disappear from the contiguous United States."

>>

>> ##

>>

>> Regulatory approaches under the Clean Air ActEdit

>>

>> ### From mobile sourcesEdit

>>

>> #### Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate

>>

>> Average Fuel Economy Standards RuleEdit

>>

>> EPA's endangerment finding in 2009 did not impose any limitations on GHGs
by itself, but was instead a prerequisite for establishing regulations for
GHGs from mobile sources under CAA section 202(a).[28] Actual emissions
requirements came later on May 7, 2010 when the EPA and the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration finalized the _Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas
Emission Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards Rule_ (LDV
Rule).[29] The LDV Rule applies to light-duty vehicles, light-duty trucks, and
medium-duty passenger vehicles (e.g., cars, sport utility vehicles, minivans,
and pickup trucks used for personal transportation) for model years 2012
through 2016. The EPA estimated that this rule will prevent 960 million metric
tons of CO 2-equivalent emissions from being emitted to the atmosphere, and
that it will save 1.8 billion barrels of oil over the lifetime of the vehicles
subject to the rule.[30]

>>

>> The LDV Rule accomplishes its objectives primarily through a traditional
command-and-control approach. The most substantial requirements come in the
form of two separate CO2 standards (one for cars and the other for trucks,
expressed on a gram per mile basis) that apply to a manufacturer's fleet of
vehicles. To determine compliance with the requirements of the rule,
manufacturers must calculate a production-weighted fleet average emissions
rate at the end of a model year and compare it to a fleet average emission
standard. The emission standard for a manufacturer in a given model year is
calculated based on the footprints of the vehicles in its fleet and the number
of vehicles produced by the manufacturer at each footprint. The standards are
designed so that they gradually become more stringent each year from 2012 to
2016.[31] The LDV Rule also includes standards of 0.010 gram/mile and 0.030
gram/mile for N2O and CH4, respectively. These standards were primarily put in
place as an anti-backsliding measure as N2O and CH4 are already emitted from
motor vehicles in relatively low amounts.[32]

>>

>> Although prescriptive regulation is among the most common policy approaches
for environmental regulation,[17] it is not without its drawbacks.
Prescriptive regulations are often criticized, for example, as being overly
rigid and uneconomical because they do not necessarily encourage regulated
entities to reduce emissions beyond the minimum standards and they may not
achieve the intended benefits at the lowest possible cost.[17][33] The LDV
Rule addresses these criticisms in a number of ways. First, as noted above,
the emissions standards gradually become more stringent over time. This not
only prevents stagnation that might occur with a single standard, it gives
manufacturers sufficient lead time to adapt to the most stringent
requirements. In addition, the LDV Rule includes a number of regulatory
flexibilities, the most significant of which is a program that allows for
banking and trading of credits. In general terms, the LDV Rule allows
manufacturers to bank emissions credits in instances where their fleet average
CO2 emissions are less than the applicable standard. Manufacturers can then
use the credits themselves where certain vehicle models fall short of the
standard, or they can sell the credits to another manufacturer. According to
EPA, these banking and trading provisions promote the environmental objectives
of the rule by addressing issues associated with technological feasibility,
lead time, and cost of compliance with the standards.[34]

>>

>> #### State regulation from motor vehiclesEdit

>>

>> With one exception, the responsibility for regulating emissions from new
motor vehicles under the CAA rests with the EPA. Section 209(a) of the Act
states in part: "No state or any political subdivision thereof shall adopt or
attempt to enforce any standard relating to the control of emissions from new
motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines subject to this part."[35] Section
209(b) of the Act provides for the exception; it grants the EPA the authority
to waive this prohibition for any state that had adopted emissions standards
for new motor vehicles or engines prior to March 30, 1966.[36] California is
the only state that meets this eligibility requirement and is thus the only
state in the nation, which can seek to obtain a waiver from the EPA. In order
to obtain a waiver and establish its own emissions requirements, the State
must demonstrate, among other things, that its standards will be at least as
protective as public health as any applicable federal standards. Once
California obtains a waiver for a particular standard, other states may
generally adopt that standard as their own.

>>

>> On September 24, 2004, the California Air Resources Board (CARB) adopted
emissions standards for GHGs from new passenger cars, light-duty trucks and
medium-duty vehicles. Not unlike the LDV Rule, California's regulations
establish standards for CO2 equivalent emissions from two classes of vehicles
on a gram per mile basis. Also like those in the LDV Rule, California's
standards become more stringent over time. CARB initially requested a waiver
from EPA for these standards on December 21, 2005. EPA denied that request on
March 6, 2008, stating that the State did not need the standards to address
compelling and extraordinary conditions (as is required by CAA section
209(b)(1)(B)) because the effects of climate change in California were not
extraordinary compared to the effects in the rest of the country.[37] Upon
reconsideration, EPA later withdrew its previous denial and approved
California's waiver request on July 8, 2009.[38] Fifteen states have adopted
California's standards.[39] Further, California and EPA have worked together
so that the two programs converge and allow automakers to produce a single
national fleet, which complies with both programs.[40]

>>

>> ### From stationary sourcesEdit

>>

>> "New Source Review" (NSR) is a permitting program established by the CAA,
which requires the owners or operators of "major" stationary sources of air
pollution to obtain permits prior to the construction or modification of those
sources. The major source NSR program has two parts:[41]

>>  
>>                         >>                                   1. the
Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) Program,

>>  
>>

>> which applies to a) sources located in areas of the country that meet the
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), and b) to pollutants for which
there are no NAAQS;[42] and

>>  
>>                         >>                                   2. the
Nonattainment New Source Review (NNSR) program, which

>>  
>>

>> applies to sources located in areas that do not meet the NAAQS.

>>

>> PSD permits are issued by EPA or a state or local government agency,
depending on who has jurisdiction over the area in which the facility is
located. In order to obtain a PSD permit, applicants must demonstrate that the
proposed new major source, or major modification to an existing source, meets
several regulatory requirements. Among those requirements are the use of the
Best Available Control Technology (BACT) to limit air pollutant emissions, and
a demonstration through air quality modeling that the source or modification
will not cause or contribute to a violation of the NAAQS.

>>

>> Under federal regulations, the PSD program applies only to sources that
emit one or more "regulated NSR pollutants."[43] In 2008, EPA Administrator
Stephen Johnson issued a memorandum to document the Agency's interpretation of
this regulatory text. In particular, Administrator Johnson stated that a
pollutant becomes a "regulated NSR pollutant" when a provision of the Act, or
regulations established under the Act, require actual control of that
pollutant but not when the Act or such regulations simply require monitoring
or reporting of emissions of that pollutant.[44] Upon request to reconsider
this interpretation, EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson confirmed that that Agency
would continue to apply the interpretation expressed in the 2008 memorandum
but she further clarified that the time at which a pollutant becomes a
"regulated NSR pollutant" is when the requirements that control emissions of
the pollutant take effect, rather than upon the promulgation of those
requirements.[45] Because the LDV Rule requires vehicle manufacturers to meet
applicable GHG standards for model year 2012 vehicles, and January 2, 2011 is
the first day upon which model year 2012 vehicles can be introduced into
commerce, the six GHGs regulated by that rule became regulated NSR pollutants
as of January 2, 2011 for purposes of the PSD program.[46]

>>

>> Among the components of the PSD program, the one that primarily applies to
GHGs is the requirement that source owners or operators utilize BACT to limit
GHG emissions from the source. Permitting authorities generally establish BACT
through a five-step analytical process, the end result of which is the
selection of one or more methods to reduce emissions of the pollutant in
question, and the setting of one or more emission limits and operational
restrictions for the emissions units undergoing review. Because the PSD
program and its requirement to utilize BACT apply to any new source or
modification at an existing source that meets established applicability
criteria, the PSD program represents a traditional command-and-control
approach to the regulation of GHGs. However, BACT is established by a
permitting authority on a case-by-case basis considering site- and source-
specific factors. During the course of a BACT analysis, a permitting authority
may, for example, temper the stringency of the final emission limit if there
are compelling adverse economic, energy, or environmental considerations.

>>

>> The PSD program is complex, and obtaining a permit can be costly for both
the applicant and the permitting authority. It has been estimated, for
example, that permit applicants expend 866 hours of labor and $125,120 on the
average PSD permit. The administrative cost to the permitting authority for
the same permit is 301 hours of labor and $23,280.[47] Traditionally, this
permitting process has been focused on controlling emissions from large
industrial sources of air pollution such as fossil fuel-fired power plants,
petroleum refineries, and a wide range of manufacturing plants that emit more
than 250 tons per year of the regulated pollutants (in some cases the
applicability threshold is 100 tons per year).[48] Prior to the regulation of
GHGs under the CAA, approximately 280 such permits were issued each year.[49]
However, GHGs are generally emitted from sources in amounts far greater than
other pollutants regulated under the PSD program. So much so, that sources
like office buildings and large shopping malls could easily cross the 250 ton
per year threshold and become subject to PSD permitting requirements. In fact,
without any action to change how the PSD program is applied, the EPA estimated
that as many as 41,000 sources may require permits _every year_ with the
addition of GHGs as a regulated pollutant. To prevent the unbearable
administrative burdens on permitting authorities associated with such "absurd
results," the EPA took action on June 3, 2010 to modify the applicability
criteria in the PSD regulations.[50] This action is known as the Prevention of
Significant Deterioration and Title V Greenhouse Gas Tailoring Rule (Tailoring
Rule). Through the Tailoring Rule, EPA raised the major source regulatory
threshold for GHGs from the 100/250 ton per year levels to 100,000 tons per
year of CO2 equivalent emissions.

>>

>> In a 5-4 decision authored by Justice Scalia, the Supreme Court remanded
the Tailoring Rule to EPA on the grounds that the Clean Air Act did not
authorize the agency to regulate all the sources encompassed by the Rule. The
Court determined that EPA could only require the "anyway" sources – those that
participated in the PSD program because of their emissions of non-GHG
pollutants -- the comply with PSD program and Title V permitting requirements
for GHGs. This effectively excluded the "Step 2" sources identified in the
final rule.

>>

>> ##

>>

>> Suitability of the Clean Air ActEdit

>>

>> Because the LDV Rule and the application of the PSD program to GHGs took
effect only recently, it is too soon to assess by how much they have reduced
actual GHG emissions and at what cost. However, given the tremendous
implications that regulation of GHGs has for almost every aspect of our
society, it should not be surprising that much has already been written about
the adequacy of the CAA for regulating global pollutants. It should also be no
surprise that opinions on this question are widely varied. Allen and
Lewis,[47] for example, contend the CAA is wholly unsuitable for regulating
GHGs because it was not designed to do so and the costs of such regulation
potentially far exceed the costs associated with climate change legislation
recently considered in Congress. As support for their argument that the CAA is
a poor fit for GHGs, they point to the "absurd results" that EPA itself
acknowledged and sought to avoid through passage of the Tailoring Rule:

>>  
>>                         >>                         _"EPA is entirely
correct: Congress did not intend to apply PSD and

>>  
>>

>> Title V to small entities, did not intend for those programs to crash under
their own weight, and did not intend for PSD to stifle economic growth.
[footnote omitted] And Congress never intended for EPA to control CO 2
emissions under the CAA! [footnote omitted] Congressional support for
regulatory climate policy is much stronger today than it was in 1970 and 1977,
when Congress enacted and amended CAA section 202. [footnote omitted] Yet even
today, the prospects for cap-and-trade legislation and for U.S. ratification
of a successor treaty to the Kyoto Protocol remain in doubt. [footnote
omitted] The notion that Congress, in 1970 or 1977, implicitly authorized EPA
to adopt economy-wide, or even industry-specific, controls on CO2 is
ludicrously unfounded. [footnote omitted]"_

>>

>> Economists Dallas Burtraw and Arthur G. Fraas with the nonprofit and
nonpartisan research organization Resources for the Future offer a different
perspective on the subject of GHG regulation under the CAA. Although they
agree that new legislation specifically designed to address climate change is
the best long-term option, they characterize the CAA as a, "potentially potent
alternative" in the absence of such legislation for the short-term.[51] They
note, for example, that EPA has already identified improvements in energy
efficiency as the most attractive short-term option for mitigating GHGs at
existing facilities in many industrial sectors. They go on to state that such
improvements would most likely be among the first moves made by regulated
entities under a legislative approach so it is unlikely that requiring these
moves through regulation would result in comparatively higher costs. Based on
their research, they conclude that domestic GHG reductions of up to 10%
relative to 2005 levels could be achieved at moderate costs, which is
comparable to reductions that would have been achieved under the Waxman-Markey
climate change bill that was passed by the House of Representatives in 2009.
In their view, the success of regulating GHGs under the CAA as it exists today
rests with the EPA:

>>  
>>                         >>                         _"We see substantial
opportunities under the Clean Air Act for domestic

>>  
>>

>> emissions reductions that can be achieved at what will probably be moderate
cost. However, enthusiasm about the act as a vehicle for carbon regulation
should be tempered. First, this paper suggests that achieving meaningful
emissions benefits at reasonable cost is possible, but it will require EPA to
be bold. The agency must interpret sections of the act to enable use of
flexible mechanisms, must be ambitious in setting emissions targets, and must
shift its focus to a new regulatory program. In short, to do all of this well,
the agency will need to innovate…. Second, EPA action under the CAA is
inferior to new legislation from Congress, especially over the long term.
Although it is possible to identify some readily available opportunities for
emissions reductions and push them via regulation (with market tools to keep
costs down), it quickly becomes difficult to identify what steps should be
taken next…. With those reservations, however, the Clean Air Act—if used
wisely by EPA—can be a useful vehicle for short-term greenhouse gas
regulation."_

>>

>> ##

>>

>> Influence of stakeholdersEdit

>>

>> Because EPA's authority to regulate GHG emissions has such significant
implications for the economy, the environment, and our society at large, it is
a topic of interest to a broad range of organizations including Congress, the
courts, the states, environmental organizations, and the regulated industry.
All of these entities have had a direct hand in shaping the laws, regulations,
and policies concerning GHGs into what they are today and will likely continue
to do so in the future. As discussed above, California has played a large role
in shaping the motor vehicle regulations. EPA's authority to regulate GHGs
under the CAA is also a topic of continuing political debate in both chambers
of Congress. On January 21, 2010, Senator Lisa Murkowski (R-AK) introduced a
disapproval resolution under the Congressional Review Act, which would have
nullified EPA's endangerment finding.[52] The resolution was defeated by a
vote of 53-47, with six Democrats voting in favor of it.[53] Later that year
on March 4, Senator Jay Rockefeller (D-WV) introduced a bill that would
suspend for two years any EPA action to regulate CO2 or CH4 under the CAA
except for the vehicle standards under section 202.[54] He re-introduced
similar legislation on January 31, 2011, the same day Senator John Barrasso
(R-WY) introduced broad legislation to preempt regulation of GHGs under
federal law.[55][56] On February 2, 2011, Representative Fred Upton (R-MI),
Representative Ed Whitfield (R-KY), and Senator James Inhofe (R-OK) released a
draft bill, which would amend the CAA to, "prohibit the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency from promulgating any regulation concerning,
taking action relating to, or taking into consideration the emission of a
greenhouse gas due to concerns regarding possible climate change, and for
other purposes."[57]

>>

>> That the major opposition to regulation of GHGs under the CAA is headed
largely by a contingent of elected officials from major coal, oil, and gas
states exemplifies the political warfare that can erupt when leaders attempt
to appeal to their core constituencies even though doing so may impede action
on pressing national problems.[58] It also underscores Al Gore's view that the
political system will be the "decisive factor" in our efforts to address
global climate change: "the real work must be done by individuals, and
politicians need to assist citizens in their efforts to make new and necessary
choices."[16] Whether Congress will act any time soon to pass cap-and-trade
legislation or revoke EPA's authority to regulate GHGs is questionable.[47]
However, even inaction by Congress in this area leaves EPA's future options
open.

>>

>> In his book _Earth in the Balance_ , Al Gore observes that, "the American
people often give their leaders permission to take action [on an issue] by
signaling agreement in principle while reserving the right to object
strenuously to each and every specific sacrifice necessary to follow
through."[16] As a recent illustration of Gore's point, consider the results
of a public opinion poll conducted in June 2010.[59] One thousand people were
asked the question: "How important is the issue of global warming to you
personally?" Seventy six percent of respondents said they considered global
warming to be extremely important, very important, or somewhat important.
Sixty eight percent of people in the same survey also said that the United
States should take action on global warming even if other major industrial
countries such as China and India do not agree to do equally effective things.
However, when asked, "[P]lease tell me whether you favor or oppose the federal
government…[increasing] taxes on gasoline so people either drive less, or buy
cars that use less gas," seventy one percent of the survey respondents said
they opposed increased gasoline taxes, despite the fact that such a tax would
be "one of the logical first steps" we would likely take in an effort to
reduce oil consumption and address climate change.[16] Thus, there is an
apparent discrepancy between the public's feelings about the threat of climate
change and its willingness to make personal sacrifices to address it. The
reluctance of both the American public and Congress to make sometimes
difficult choices to address climate change has left opportunities wide open
for other stakeholders to influence climate change policy; among the most
influential thus far are non-governmental organizations (NGOs).

>>

>> In his article, "Learning to Live with NGOs," P.J. Simmons wrote that NGOs
can, "make the impossible possible by doing what governments cannot or will
not."[60] History shows that this is particularly true where climate change
regulation is concerned. While NGOs cannot themselves pass climate change
regulations, they have played a clear role in forcing EPA's hand through
action in the courts. EPA's endangerment finding, the LDV Rule, and the
consequent regulation of GHGs from stationary sources under the PSD program
are a direct result of the Supreme Court's decision in _Massachusetts v.
EPA_.[47] As discussed supra, that case is founded on the petition submitted
to EPA in 1999 by the International Center for Technology Assessment and
nineteen other NGOs. With passage of the LDV Rule, EPA did what ICTA and its
fellow petitioners demanded more than ten years earlier. And a number of NGOs
have continued to apply pressure to EPA. On December 23, 2010, EPA announced
that it would establish GHG standards for new and modified electric generating
units (EGUs) and petroleum refineries under section 111(b) of the CAA, and
that it would set GHG emissions guidelines for existing sources in those same
categories under CAA section 111(d);[61] these emissions standards and
guidelines will be established according to a schedule set forth in settlement
agreements into which EPA entered to settle legal challenges brought forth by
several NGOs and states after EPA failed to establish GHG standards when it
revised its rules for EGUs and refineries in 2006 and 2008.[62][63] Under the
terms of the agreement, EPA will issue final standards for EGUs and refineries
in May 2012 and November 2012, respectively.

>>

>> EPA's actions to address climate change are also being challenged by those
most directly affected – the regulated community. Over eighty claims have been
filed by thirty-five different petitioners against EPA related to the
endangerment finding, the LDV Rule, the Tailoring Rule, and another rule
related to the PSD program.[64] A large number of the parties in these cases
are businesses and industry associations (acting in the interests of
businesses) such as Peabody Energy Company, Gerdau Ameristeel U.S. Inc.,
Coalition for Responsible Regulation, National Association of Manufacturers,
Portland Cement Association, National Mining Association, American Farm Bureau
Association, and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.[65] These claims have been
consolidated into _Coalition for Responsible Regulation v. U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency_ ( _CRR v. EPA_ ) under three main docket numbers, 09-1322,
10-1092, and 10-1073.[64] The arguments put forth by the plaintiffs are
numerous and varied, depending on the particular case but most are
fundamentally about the economic impacts of regulation. A summary of the
arguments has been compiled by Gregory Wannier of The Center for Climate
Change Law at the Columbia Law School.[64] On June 26, 2012, the Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit issued an opinion in _CRR v. EPA_
which dismissed the challenges in these cases to the EPA's endangerment
finding and the related GHG regulations.[66] The three-judge panel unanimously
upheld the EPA's central finding that GHG such as carbon dioxide endanger
public health and were likely responsible for the global warming experienced
over the past half century.

>>

>> ##

>>

>> See alsoEdit

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Climate
change policy of the United States

>>  
>>                                   * Environmental policy of the Donald
Trump administration

>>  
>>

>> ##

>>

>> ReferencesEdit

>>  
>>                         >>                                   1. **^** Court
Backs E.P.A. Over Emissions Limits Intended to

>>  
>>

>> Reduce Global Warming June 26, 2012

>>  
>>                         >>                                   2. **^** D.C.
appeals court upholds EPA regulations to fight

>>  
>>

>> global warming by Darryl Fears, June 26, 2012

>>  
>>                         >>                                   3. **^** 42
U.S.C. § 4521(a)(1). Retrieved from

>>  
>>

>> https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/42/7521-

>>  
>>                         >>                                   4. ^ _**a**_
_**b**_ International Center for Technology

>>  
>>

>> Assessment. (1999). _Petition for Rulemaking and Collateral Relief Seeking
the Regulation of Greenhouse Gas Emissions from New Motor Vehicles Under
[Section] 202 of the Clean Air Act_. Retrieved April 9, 2011 from
http://www.icta.org/doc/ghgpet2.pdf

>>  
>>                         >>                                   5. **^** 68
Fed. Reg. 173 (8 September 2003) pp. 52922, 52928

>>  
>>                                   6. **^** 68 Fed. Reg. 52929-52932

>>  
>>                                   7. **^** 549 U.S. 497 (2007);

>>  
>>

>> https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/06pdf/05-1120.pdf

>>  
>>                         >>                                   8. **^** 74
Fed. Reg. 239 (15 December 2009) p. 66501

>>  
>>                                   9. **^** Environmental and Energy Study
Institute. "Timeline

>>  
>>

>> of EPA Action on Greenhouse Gases". Retrieved August 3, 2011.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   10. ^ _**a**_
_**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Kelley, I. (2008).

>>  
>>

>> _Energy In America: A Tour of our Fossil Fuel Culture and Beyond_.
Burlington, Vermont: University Press of New England

>>  
>>                         >>                                   11. **^**
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2007).

>>  
>>

>> _Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report_. Retrieved from:
http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr.pdf, at p. 30,
"Warming of the climate system is unequivocal"

>>  
>>                         >>                                   12. **^**
Karl, T. R., Melillo, J., M., & Peterson, T. C.,

>>  
>>

>> (eds.). (2009). _Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States_. New
York: Cambridge University Press. "Global average temperature and sea level
have increased, and precipitation patterns have changed. The global warming of
the past 50 years is due primarily to human-induced increases in heat-trapping
gases."

>>  
>>                         >>                                   13. **^** U.S.
Energy Information Administration. (2009).

>>  
>>

>> _Annual Energy Review_

>>  
>>                         >>                                   14. **^** U.S.
Energy Information Administration. (2011).

>>  
>>

>> _Annual Energy Outlook, Early Release_

>>  
>>                         >>                                   15. **^** 74
Fed. Reg. 66538-66540

>>  
>>                                   16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_
_**e**_ _**f**_ Gore, A.

>>  
>>

>> (1992). _Earth in the Balance: Ecology and the Human Spirit_. New York:
Rodale.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   17. ^ _**a**_
_**b**_ _**c**_ Salzman. J., & Thompson, B. H.,

>>  
>>

>> (2010). _Environmental Law and Policy_. New York: Thomson
Reuters/Foundation Press

>>  
>>                         >>                                   18. **^**
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (1995).

>>  
>>

>> _Climate Change 1995: Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change_.
Retrieved from:
http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/sar/wg_III/ipcc_sar_wg_III_full_report.pdf

>>  
>>                         >>                                   19. **^**
Dimitrov, R., (2010). Inside the UN Climate Change

>>  
>>

>> Negotiations: The Copenhagen Conference. Review of Policy Research, 27(6),
795-821.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   20. **^** 74
Fed. Reg. 239 (15 December 2009) pp. 66496-66546.

>>  
>>                                   21. **^** 74 Fed. Reg. 66511

>>  
>>                                   22. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_
Intergovernmental Panel

>>  
>>

>> on Climate Change. (2007). _Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report_.
Retrieved from: http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr.pdf

>>  
>>                         >>                                   23. **^** 74
Fed. Reg. 66514

>>  
>>                                   24. **^** 74 Fed. Reg. 66517; See also
IPCC, _Climate Change

>>  
>>

>> 2007_ 37

>>  
>>                         >>                                   25. **^** 74
Fed. Reg. 66524-66525

>>  
>>                                   26. **^** U.S. EPA. (n.d.) Ground Level
Ozone. Retrieved from:

>>  
>>

>> http://www.epa.gov/air/ozonepollution/

>>  
>>                         >>                                   27. **^** 74
Fed. Reg. 66530-66536

>>  
>>                                   28. **^** U.S. EPA. (n.d.). _EPA's
Endangerment Finding_ –

>>  
>>

>> Frequently Asked Questions. Retrieved from:
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/endangerment/downloads/EndangermentFinding_FAQs.pdf

>>  
>>                         >>                                   29. **^** 75
Fed. Reg. 88 (7 May 2010) pp. 25324-25728.

>>  
>>                                   30. **^** 75 Fed. Reg. 25397

>>  
>>                                   31. **^** 75 Fed. Reg. 25408-25413

>>  
>>                                   32. **^** 75 Fed. Reg. 25401

>>  
>>                                   33. **^** Olmstead, S. (2010). "Applying
Market Principles to

>>  
>>

>> Environmental Policy." In Vig, N. J., & Kraft, M. E. (eds.), _Environmental
Policy: New Directions for the Twenty-First Century_ (pp. 99-124). Washington,
DC: CQ Press

>>  
>>                         >>                                   34. **^** 75
Fed. Reg. 25412-25414

>>  
>>                                   35. **^** 42 U.S.C. 7543(a)

>>  
>>                                   36. **^** 42 U.S.C. 7543(b)

>>  
>>                                   37. **^** 73 Fed. Reg. 45 (6 March 2008)

>>  
>>                                   38. **^** 74 Fed. Reg. 129 (8 July 2009)

>>  
>>                                   39. **^** Center for Climate and Energy
Solutions. (2011).

>>  
>>

>> Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards. Retrieved April 9, 2011 from
http://www.c2es.org/what_s_being_done/in_the_states/vehicle_ghg_standard.cfm

>>  
>>                         >>                                   40. **^** 75
Fed. Reg. 25326-25328

>>  
>>                                   41. **^** U.S. EPA. (1990). _New Source
Review Workshop

>>  
>>

>> Manual: Prevention of Significant Deterioration and Nonattainment Area
Permitting_. Retrieved from: http://www.epa.gov/ttn/nsr/gen/wkshpman.pdf

>>  
>>                         >>                                   42. **^** 75
Fed. Reg. 106 (3 June 2010) p. 31560

>>  
>>                                   43. **^** 40 CFR § 52.21(b)(50)

>>  
>>                                   44. **^** Johnson, S. L. (2008, December
18). [Letter to EPA

>>  
>>

>> Regional Administrators].
http://www.epa.gov/NSR/documents/psd_interpretive_memo_12.18.08.pdf. See also
73 Fed. Reg. 251 (31 December 2008) pp. 80300-80301

>>  
>>                         >>                                   45. **^** 75
Fed. Reg. 63 (2 April 2010) p. 17006

>>  
>>                                   46. **^** 75 Fed. Reg. 17109

>>  
>>                                   47. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_
Allen, G. F., & Lewis,

>>  
>>

>> M. (2010). Finding the Proper Forum for Regulation of U.S. Greenhouse Gas
Emissions: The Legal and Economic Implications of Massachusetts V. EPA.
University of Richmond Law Review, 44, 919-935

>>  
>>                         >>                                   48. **^** 42
U.S.C. 7479(1)

>>  
>>                                   49. **^** 74 Fed. Reg. 206 (27 October
2009) pp. 55292-55365

>>  
>>                                   50. **^** 75 Fed. Reg. 106 (3 June 2010)
p. 31514-31608

>>  
>>                                   51. **^** Burtraw, D., Fraas, G., &
Richardson, N. (2011).

>>  
>>

>> Greenhouse Gas Regulation under the Clean Air Act: A Guide for Economists
(Discussion Paper No. RFF DP 11-08). Retrieved from the Resources for the
Future website:
http://www.rff.org/Publications/Pages/PublicationDetails.aspx?PublicationID=21461

>>  
>>                         >>                                   52. **^**
Murkowski, L. (January 21, 2010). "Sen. Murkowski

>>  
>>

>> Offers Disapproval Resolution to Block EPA Endangerment of Economy". Press
release. Retrieved 2-27-2011 from:
http://murkowski.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?p=PressReleases&ContentRecord_id=7a4b5017-15eb-41ff-922b-6ae3975cbe87&ContentType_id=b94acc28-404a-4fc6-b143-a9e15bf92da4&Group_id=c01df158-d935-4d7a-895d-f694ddf41624&MonthDisplay=1&YearDisplay=2010

>>  
>>                         >>                                   53. **^**
OpenCongress. (n.d.). S.J.Res.26. Retrieved from:

>>  
>>

>> "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2012-11-03. Retrieved
2012-12-28.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)

>>  
>>                         >>                                   54. **^**
Rockefeller, J., (March 4, 2010). "Rockefeller

>>  
>>

>> Introduces Legislation to Suspend EPA Action and Protect Clean Coal State
Economies". Press Release. Retrieved 2-27-2011 from:
http://rockefeller.senate.gov/press/record.cfm?id=322764

>>  
>>                         >>                                   55. **^**
OpenCongress. (n.d.). S.231 - EPA Stationary Source

>>  
>>

>> Regulations Suspension Act. Retrieved from:
http://www.opencongress.org/bill/112-s231/show

>>  
>>                         >>                                   56. **^**
OpenCongress. (n.d.). S.228 - Defending America's

>>  
>>

>> Affordable Energy and Jobs Act. Retrieved from:
http://www.opencongress.org/bill/112-s228/show

>>  
>>                         >>                                   57. **^**
House Energy and Commerce Committee. (February 2,

>>  
>>

>> 2011). "Upton, Whitfield, Inhofe Unveil Energy Tax Prevention Act to
Protect America's Jobs & Families". Press Release. Retrieved 2-27-2011 from:
http://energycommerce.house.gov/news/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=8178; see also
http://energycommerce.house.gov/media/file/PDFs/GG_01_xml.pdf

>>  
>>                         >>                                   58. **^**
Kraft, M. (2010). "Environmental Policy in

>>  
>>

>> Congress." In Vig, N. J., & Kraft, M. E. (eds.), _Environmental Policy: New
Directions for the Twenty-First Century_ (pp. 99-124). Washington, DC: CQ
Press

>>  
>>                         >>                                   59. **^**
Krosnick. J. (2010). Global Warming Poll: Selected

>>  
>>

>> Results. Retrieved from Stanford University, Woods Institute for the
Environment website: http://woods.stanford.edu/research/americans-support-
govt-solutions-global-warming.html

>>  
>>                         >>                                   60. **^**
Simmons, P. J. (1998). "Learning to live with NGOs."

>>  
>>

>> _Foreign Policy_ , 112, 82-96

>>  
>>                         >>                                   61. **^**
Environmental Protection Agency. (December 23,

>>  
>>

>> 2010). "EPA to Set Modest Pace for Greenhouse Gas Standards / Agency
stresses flexibility and public input in developing cost-effective and
protective GHG standards for largest emitters." Press release. Retrieved April
9, 2011 from
http://yosemite.epa.gov/opa/admpress.nsf/6424ac1caa800aab85257359003f5337/d2f038e9daed78de8525780200568bec!OpenDocument

>>  
>>                         >>                                   62. **^**
Environmental Protection Agency. (2010). Settlement

>>  
>>

>> Agreement [concerning fossil fuel-fired power plants]. Retrieved from
http://www.epa.gov/airquality/ghgsettlement.html

>>  
>>                         >>                                   63. **^**
Environmental Protection Agency. (2010). Settlement

>>  
>>

>> Agreement [concerning petroleum refineries]. Retrieved from
http://www.epa.gov/airquality/ghgsettlement.html

>>  
>>                         >>                                   64. ^ _**a**_
_**b**_ _**c**_ Wannier, G. E. (2010). EPA's

>>  
>>

>> Impending Greenhouse Gas Regulations: Digging through the Morass of
Litigation. Retrieved from Columbia Law School, Center for Climate Change Law
website: http://blogs.law.columbia.edu/climatechange/2010/11/24/white-paper-
epas-impending-greenhouse-gas-regulations-digging-through-the-morass-of-
litigation/

>>  
>>                         >>                                   65. **^**
Arnold & Porter LLP. (n.d.). Climate Change

>>  
>>

>> Litigation in the U.S. Retrieved from http://www.climatecasechart.com/

>>  
>>                         >>                                   66. **^**
_Coalition for Responsible Regulation, Inc. v. EPA_

>>  
>>

>> (D.C. Cir. Jun. 26, 2012). Text FindLaw

>>

>>
![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1&mobile=1)

>>

>> Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Regulation_of_greenhouse_gases_under_the_Clean_Air_Act&oldid=875624944"

>>

>> Last edited on 27 December 2018, at 22:25

>>

>> ## ![Wikipedia](/static/images/mobile/copyright/wikipedia-wordmark-en.png)

>>

>> Content is available under CC BY-SA 3.0 unless otherwise noted.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Terms of Use

>>  
>>                                   * Privacy

>>  
>>                                   * Desktop

>>  
>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow *[↓]:
Down Arrow

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow

