
>

>> >>                                   * start here

>>  
>>                                   * home

>>  
>>                                   * about

>>  
>>                                   * data sources

>>  
>>                                   * RC wiki

>>  
>>                                   * contributors

>>  
>>                                   * index

>>  
>>                                   * archive

>>  
>>

>> # ![RealClimate logo](/images/logo2.jpg)

>>

>> ### The climate has always changed. What do you conclude?

>>

>> Filed under:

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Climate
Science

>>  
>>                                   * Communicating Climate

>>  
>>                                   * Paleoclimate

>>  
>>                                   * skeptics

>>  
>>

>> \-- stefan @ 20 July 2017

>>

>> Probably everyone has heard this argument, presented as objection against
the findings of climate scientists on global warming: _" The climate has
always changed!"_ And it is true: climate has changed even before humans began
to burn fossil fuels. So what can we conclude from that?

>>

>> **A quick quiz**

>>

>> Do you conclude…

>>

>> (1) that humans cannot change the climate?

>>

>> (2) that we do not know whether humans are to blame for global warming?

>>

>> (3) that global warming will not have any severe consequences?

>>

>> (4) that we cannot stop global warming?

>>

>> **The answer**

>>

>> Not one of these answers is correct. None of these conclusions would be
logical. Why not?

>>

>> **(1)** The opposite conclusion is correct: if the climate had hardly
changed during the course of the Earth 's history (despite variable incoming
solar radiation and changing amounts of CO2 in the atmosphere), then we would
conclude that there are strong stabilizing feedbacks in the climate system.
The drastic climate changes in the history of the Earth (ice ages, hot ice-
free periods) show that the climate system is sensitive to changes in the
radiation budget. The measure for this sensitivity is called climate
sensitivity: how much global warming will result from a CO2 doubling in the
air? For the first time it was estimated by the Nobel laureate Svante
Arrhenius in 1896. According to our modern knowledge this climate sensitivity
is around 3°C (uncertainty ± 1°C).

>>

>> Paleoclimatologists determine the climate sensitivity from data from the
Earth's history. A recent review article in _Nature_ on this method showed "a
warming around 2.2 to 4.8 °C per doubling of atmospheric CO2, which agrees
with IPCC estimates". In short: the larger past natural climate changes have
been, the more vulnerable is the climate system, and the more it will react to
the greenhouse gases that humans are adding to the system.

>>

>> **(2)** Imagine there has been a forest fire. The police have extensive
evidence that it was arson. They know the place where the fire began. They
found traces of fire accelerants. Witnesses observed a man whose car was
parked nearby. In his trunk the police finds bottles with fire accelerants,
and in his house they find even more of it. He has been convicted for arson
several times before. Plus some further evidence. In court, he defends
himself: forest fires have always occurred lit by lightning, even before there
was any man on Earth. Therefore he must be innocent. Does the argument
convince you?

>>

>> The evidence for the human cause of global warming is overwhelming. This is
why there has been a consensus among climate researchers for a long time, and
almost every scientific academy on the planet has come to the same conclusion.
The most important evidence: when it gets warmer, the energy has to come from
somewhere (1st law of thermodynamics). It can only come through the radiation
budget of our planet. (No, Rick Perry, the energy does not come out of the
ocean. To the contrary, measurements show heat is going into the oceans). The
changes in this energy balance are quite well known and are shown near the
front of any IPCC report - see Fig. 1. The biggest factor is the increase in
CO2 concentration as well as a few other greenhouse gases, also added by human
activities. The incoming solar radiation has changed just a tiny bit in
comparison - since 1950, by the way, it has even decreased and thus offset a
small part of the human-caused warming – hence humans have probably caused
more warming than is observed (best estimate is 110% of observed warming).

>>

>> ![](http://www.realclimate.org/images//AR4spm2-600x451.jpg)

>>

>> **_Fig. 1_** _Radiative forcing is the cause of global temperature
changes._ _Red bars show warming, blue bars cooling effects._ _I am showing
the diagram from the fourth IPCC report of 2007, because it is easier to
understand than the more recent from the 5th IPCC Report of 2013, which
Gavindiscussed here. The overall human-caused radiative forcing, which is
given here as 1.6 watts per square meter, had already risen to 2.3 watts per
square meter by the year 2011 according to the 5th IPCC report._ _Source:_
_IPCC report 4 Fig. SPM.2_ _._

>>

>> Overall, humans have caused an additional heating (radiative forcing) of
2.3 watts per square meter of Earth surface - as of 2011. It has increased
further since.

>>

>> **(3)** Those who can’t deny that humans are causing warming often seek
refuge in the hope that the consequences might not be so bad, so we might just
adapt rather than having to stop further warming. The climatic changes in
Earth’s history do not support this point of view. As a result of the global
warming by around 5 ° C from the last ice age 15,000 years ago to the mid-
Holocene, global sea levels rose by 120 meters until 5,000 years ago! At that
time hardly a problem – but for today's humankind even a rise of two meters
would be a disaster, bringing devastation to coastal cities and small island
states. We still have enough ice on Greenland and Antarctica to raise the sea
level around the world by 65 meters. Both ice masses are losing ice more and
more quickly. The West Antarctic has probably already crossed its tipping
point and is unstable. Greenland could soon follow.

>>

>> **_Fig. 2_** _Ice loss of Greenland measured by GRACE satellites._
_Source:_ _NASA_ _._

>>

>> By the way: the just mentioned 5°C rise within ten thousand years at the
end of the ice age are among the fastest global temperature rises documented
in the Earth's history. That is 0.05 degrees per century. In the last hundred
years we have caused the twentyfold rise. This pace of change overtaxes the
adaptability of many ecosystems and will lead to their collapse as the warming
progresses. In coral reefs this is already in progress.

>>

>> The pace of the completely man-made CO2 increase (by now the CO2
concentration is higher than at any time in the past three million years)
leads to a rapid acidification of the world's oceans, because it overcomes the
buffer capacity of the oceans. The last major acidification event 250 million
years ago has apparently led to a massive extinction of species in the world's
oceans.

>>

>> **(4)** Often I hear that the aims of the Paris Climate Agreement are
absurd, because humans cannot stabilize the global temperature – after all,
our climate changes even without human intervention. This argument is also
wrong. As already mentioned, without human interference there would have been
no global warming since the middle of the 20th century. If anything there
would have been a slight natural cooling. The fluctuations in the sun 's
activity are causing variations of 0.1 or 0.2 °C in global temperature in the
last thousand years (e.g. at the Maunder Minimum of solar activity in the
years 1645 to 1715). In the longer term, the astronomical Milankovitch cycles
of the Earth's orbit and the Earth's axis dominate the natural climate changes
(hence the ice ages). The shortest of these cycles has a period of 23,000
years - for the next hundred years, it practically does not matter. However,
our fortune would last much longer than that: the Milankovitch cycles can be
calculated over millions of years with astronomical precision (and
incidentally be used to predict the beginning of all the past ice ages), and
according to that, the next major climate change would arrive only in about
50,000 years. Namely the next ice age.

>>

>> So if we weren’t doing something really stupid, we could benefit from
another 50,000 years with a stable climate. Nothing in our knowledge of
paleoclimatology suggests that natural factors could prevent us from limiting
global warming to below 2°C. Only our own dithering, our own inertia can do
that. Or that we prefer to be lulled into fatal complacency by the reassuring
fairy tales of the "climate skeptics" rather than confronting the danger.

>>

>> Among the most ill-informed claims of those “skeptics” is the assertion
that climate researchers do not know or consciously ignore the fact that the
climate has always changed. Utter nonsense, of course. Almost all of the
authors here at Realclimate have done substantial work in paleoclimate for
decades, as you can see from our publication lists (including the textbook
Paleoclimatology). A lot of other climate researchers do the same. This May,
three of us were at a conference of almost one thousand paleoclimatologists in
Zaragoza (see photo below). These researchers know more about the natural,
past climate changes than anyone else. Nobody there expressed any doubts about
the ongoing human-caused global warming. On the contrary, many
paleoclimatologists are particularly concerned about anthropogenic warming,
especially in view of our findings about Earth's history. Already when I was
working as lead author on the paleoclimate chapter of the 4th IPCC report more
than a decade ago, some of the discussions within IPCC revolved around us
paleoclimatologists regarding some risks as considerably more serious than the
colleagues specializing in the modern climate, such as the risk of rapid sea
level rise or instability of ocean currents and ice sheets.

>>

>> Whoever tells you that the fact that "the climate has always changed" is
somehow reassuring, does not know what he is talking about - or he is trying
to con you.

>>

>> ![](http://www.realclimate.org/images//osm17-group-crop-600x271.jpg)

>>

>> _Paleoclimatologists: participants in the_ _PAGES Open Science Meeting_ _in
Zaragoza in May 2017_

>>

>> Comments (243).

>>

>> ### 243 Responses to "The climate has always changed. What do you
conclude?"

>>

>> 1 2 3 … 5 Next »

>>  
>>                         >>                                   1. 1

>>  
>>

>> Tim C says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 3:47 AM

>>

>> The "Climate has always changed" argument always amuses me. If anybody says
that I ask them for thermometer data proving that. When they can't I ask how
they know the climate has changed. Then they get stuck! It's a remarkable feat
of double-think to trust the paleoclimate data but not the Paleoclimatologists
who produce it!

>>  
>>                         >>                                   2. 2

>>  
>>

>> Mack says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 4:09 AM

>>

>> That's a nice colourful chart you've got there, of the Radiative forcings,
Stefan. Are you expecting to have all your students to accept it with
gullible, nodding approval? You've got all these " anthropogenic" forcings, in
watts/sq.m, and then the little slot for the "natural" solar forcing…
irradiance of 0.12 w/sq.m. I would have thought that would be a tad out…maybe
168w/sq.m in your case…perhaps 340w/sq.m in my case?

>>

>> [ **Response:** Try to think about this a little. Go on, we 'll wait. -
gavin]

>>  
>>                         >>                                   3. 3

>>  
>>

>> jgnfld says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 4:28 AM

>>

>> The denier answer has usually been "e. Any or all of the above according to
the needs of the moment."

>>  
>>                         >>                                   4. 4

>>  
>>

>> Adam Lea says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 5:01 AM

>>

>> Regarding (4), I think there is some truth in that, not because of
theoretical physical arguments, but because of human psychology. I really have
my doubts that enough of the global population do, or will take it seriously
enough to drive those with the power and influence to take proper action on a
nationwide scale (i.e. not micro-steps that ultimately make a negligible
difference). The hard-wired cognitive biases that worked well for survival in
the hunter-gatherer days, but are dreadful in today's completely different
complex civilizations, are too powerful to overcome, we collectively don't
have sufficient intelligence to override in the face of the evidence which
strongly suggests we should. Perhaps if humans were more like Vulcans, and
operated by logic and reason instead of feeling and emotion, we'd not be in
this situation, but sadly this is not the case.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   5. 5

>>  
>>

>> Joseph says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 6:38 AM

>>

>> I am a skeptic of the claims regarding 50,000 years of future Holocene-like
conditions. Aren't the neo-glacial readvances and other signs of a cooling
climate during the past 3,000 years evidence of a gradual return to glacial
conditions (prior to the anthropogenic influence brought on by the industrial
revolution)? Isn't Milankovitch forcing only the pacemaker for an inherently
wobbly glacial-interglacial oscillatory system?

>>  
>>                         >>                                   6. 6

>>  
>>

>> Tim C says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 7:05 AM

>>

>> Adam Lea (4) says: "Perhaps if humans were more like Vulcans, and operated
by logic and reason instead of feeling and emotion"

>>

>> I understand this point of view, but I don't know how far logic and reason
would get us. Fundamentally, we need to care about future generations and
other sentient beings. Which, it would seem, we don't; or not enough of us in
positions that matter.

>>

>> I know that, to use a cliché, accountants and even some economists might be
persuaded by the cost/benefit analysis showing costs of inaction outweigh the
benefits. However, I think that approach is going to have limited success in
the long run. We need a shift in hearts/minds . People in public (and private)
office could, for example, be required to demonstrate compassion before being
put into office and, when in office, maintain (say) regular compassion
meditation practice. Just a thought.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   7. 7

>>  
>>

>> alphagruis says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 7:16 AM

>>

>> Regarding (4), I also think there is truth in it. Of course ! There is
strictly no evidence (and actually rather a lot against) that 7+ billion
people might ever live in a decent way on renewable or even nuclear energy.
Curbing massively the fossil fuel use means most likely harming and eventually
killing the poor and even middle classes and there are a lot of them and they
most likely won't "accept" it. Is there any doubt about the outcome if someone
is given the choice to die right now or **possibly** in a few decades because
a computer model tells him or her so ? All along their evolutionary path,
living creatures, even humans, did and could never behave otherwise. Immediate
survival must outweigh everything. Fossil fuels (un)fortunately permitted
human population to overshoot and most likely only running out of this
resource may stop the CO2 emissions. It 's unlikely to be the climate threat.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   8. 8

>>  
>>

>> Jim Eager says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 7:27 AM

>>

>> Mack wrote @2: " _I would have thought …_ "

>>

>> But that's exactly what you did not do.

>>

>> I hope Gavin is not holding his breath as he waits for the penny to drop
for you.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   9. 9

>>  
>>

>> Tom says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 7:52 AM

>>

>> Minor editorial point - the entry opens with four yes/no questions, and
then asserts that "not one of these answers is correct". This implies to me
that the "correct" response in each case would be "other".

>>  
>>                         >>                                   10. 10

>>  
>>

>> Aido says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 9:07 AM

>>

>> If I were defending the guy against the forest fire charge, I'd have
statistics for every fire started by lightning going back to when records
began; I'd have a list as long as your arm of the other uses those
'accelerants' could be put to; i would not allow any mention of previous
history of arson; i would find character witnesses; In short, I would create
reasonable doubt. He'd be acquitted.

>>

>> 100 scientists published a book rubbishing einstein's theory of relativity.

>>

>> Consensus belongs in religion, not in science.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   11. 11

>>  
>>

>> izen says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 9:10 AM

>>

>> @-Mack  
>  I expect Stefan's students would apply critical thinking to WHY the chart
shows solar insolation as 0.12W/m2 instead of the 340W/m2 they might have
naively assumed.  
>  It might enable them to understand what the diagram shows.

>>

>> Whether you are gullible enough to accept the figures as accurate depends
on how much credibility you put in the multitude of observational measurements
taken by different methods over many decades by diverse groups of researchers
that form a strong consilience of mutually supporting evidence for the
validity of the estimates and the possible errors.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   12. 12

>>  
>>

>> Nemesis says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 9:32 AM

>>

>> "The climate has always changed. What do you conclude?"

>>

>> Aaah, another funny game with the deniers^^ Uh uh,we got lots and lots of
time to play funny game with the deniers, yes?

>>  
>>                         >>                                   13. 13

>>  
>>

>> BojanD says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 9:45 AM

>>

>> Wow @Mack, that feeling, ah, when you deliver a nice checkmate only to
realize you were playing suicide chess!

>>  
>>                         >>                                   14. 14

>>  
>>

>> Donald H. Campbell says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:00 AM

>>

>> Stefan-On target again. However, on Item #4 about stopping Global Warming,
knowing climate change inertia, particularly the physics of that process,
would help in the argument that we can do something about the rate of warming.
Knowing the assumptions in such calculations is required, all stated in
elementary terms for best effect.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   15. 15

>>  
>>

>> Chris Colose says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:01 AM

>>

>> I find the argument frustrating on a different level. Something that has
always bugged me even more than the obvious logical fallacies you point out is
the uncontested claim that "climate has always changed," which is an assertion
that reads very differently than, "climate has changed even before humans
began to burn fossil fuels."

>>

>> Perhaps this is an esoteric frustration, but the claim itself is "not even
wrong," at least without defining a reasonable level of granularity for what
constitutes "climate change." I have at least a magnitude and temporal
dimension in mind.

>>

>> To the uninitiated, I suspect the claim reads as though climate is a highly
variable entity (it would be worth polling an audience for how they interpret
it) that just gets up on its own and does what it wants on decadal timescales,
sort of like a random walk that is unconstrained by any physics.

>>

>> But how many actual distinct in-Holocene "climates" are there? Surely, the
climate from 1600-1629 was slightly different than that from 1630-1659, or
1400-1429, but not by very much. How many distinct climates are there over the
past 1 million years? Glacial, interglacial…at a somewhat finer level the mid-
Holocene is distinct from the late Holocene, or a stadial different from an
interstadial glacial. So, that is maybe half a dozen distinct climates (while
retaining some statistically distinct robustness), and the bigger differences
tend to be more slowly evolving in time.

>>

>> Geologically speaking, there's some large changes…the oxygenation of the
atmosphere, snowball (or quasi-snowball) events, the Eocene hothouse periods,
etc. All of these things, however, are embedded in a long 4.5 billion year
history, giving you a pretty low "climate change density" in time. There's
temporal resolution loss as you go back, but I suspect that for a given
background climate, there's a lot of "boringness" within it (e.g., how much
in-Eocene or in-Snowball variability do we actually expect? Likely not enough
to matter much for organisms adapted to the broad environmental boundary
conditions at the time).

>>  
>>                         >>                                   16. 16

>>  
>>

>> John says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:14 AM

>>

>> It's easy to understand why human activity has substantially increased CO2
in the atmosphere in the industrial era. But what non-human causes produced
the high levels of CO2 in past times that caused hot periods with much higher
sea levels? And, absent the "recent" human-caused increases in CO2, when would
non-human causes have done the same thing?

>>  
>>                         >>                                   17. 17

>>  
>>

>> mike says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:23 AM

>>

>> the "climate has always changed" argument is not advanced in good faith
unless it is advanced in total ignorance of climatology. It is not a good use
of time to engage with anyone this ignorant and/or dishonest.

>>

>> Remember that it makes no sense to mudwrestle with pigs, you both get dirty
and the pig likes it.

>>

>> Mike

>>  
>>                         >>                                   18. 18

>>  
>>

>> Alastair McDonald says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:26 AM

>>

>> I had been thinking about the statement "The climate has always changed"
just last week, and it seems to me to be untrue! The climate during the
Holocene has been stable. It did not change, allowing modern civilisation to
emerge. In the previous period, the Younger Dryas stadial (YD), it was fairly
stable too, although very cold. There was, of course, an abrupt change at the
end of the YD, although the abrupt change at the start is better known. So my
point is that the climate is not **always** changing, but when it does change
it does so abruptly.

>>

>> You can see this effect if you study sedimentary rocks. They consist of
beds where the climate has remained stable,and bed surfaces where the climate
has changed abruptly and a new stable bed has begun to be deposited. This
corresponds with the evolutionary concept of punctuated equilibrium.

>>

>> So AGW will not be a slow rise in temperature corresponding to a linear
sensitivity. It will result in an abrupt change from the current stable state
to a new stable state. When a tipping point is reached, positive feedbacks
will overwhelm the negative feedbacks that are keeping the present climate
stable.

>>

>> Instead of looking for some catastrophic cause for the YD, we should be
looking for the passing of a tipping point such as the rise in sea level
breaching the Bering Strait. The fresher water from the Pacific would have
expanded the sea ice into the GIN Seas turning the climate of Western Europe
from maritime to continental with Arctic style winters. (The sea ice would
also have halted the Conveyor.)

>>

>> The sea ice melted when the intensity of solar radiation passed a tipping
point, and the YD ended. The remaining sea ice will disappear when CO2 passes
a tipping point, and another abrupt change will happen.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   19. 19

>>  
>>

>> patrick says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:27 AM

>>

>> "Whoever tells you that the fact that “the climate has always changed” is
somehow reassuring, does not know what he is talking about – or he is trying
to con you." This is a great post on an important subject.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   20. 20

>>  
>>

>> patrick says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:31 AM

>>

>> "Whoever tells you that the fact that 'the climate has always changed' is
somehow reassuring, does not know what he is talking about – or he is trying
to con you." This is a great post on an important subject.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   21. 21

>>  
>>

>> Bernie Thomas says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:36 AM

>>

>> You ask the question: "So what can we conclude from that?" But you limit
the responses to four choices of your own construct. I think the obvious
choice you omitted would also be the most popular one: That conclusion would
be:

>>

>> 5) Before mankind, all climate change was from natural causes.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   22. 22

>>  
>>

>> Johan Stroman says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:40 AM

>>

>> In response to Adam Lea, there is an interesting article in NYT about how
the international and massive response to the perceived Y2K threat serves to
inform how we might successfully respond to climate change. It highlights the
psychology (mostly fear) that took hold mid-1990's to prevent what was thought
to be able to disrupt many critical data systems globally triggering financial
and societal collapse. While misplaced in the grand scheme, it highlights how
fast the mobilization was - and how many systems were upgraded to short and
long term benefit. It also points to our need to pull people on board, with
the opportunities and benefits to the solutions - energy conservation,
electric cars, smart communities, hubbed transit, renewable energy - which
inspire action, bring hope and energizes people to take part.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   23. 23

>>  
>>

>> Victor says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 11:26 AM

>>

>> Nicely argued, Stefan.

>>

>> However:

>>

>> When examining the many graphs depicting the history of worldwide
temperatures over the 20th and 21st centuries, I see no evidence of a long-
term correlation between CO2 emissions and temperature. It's not just a matter
of the controversial "hiatus," but the entire picture from the late 1800s to
the present. I've made this point before, but never received a convincing
response.

>>

>> From ca. 1910 through ca. 1940 we see a sharp increase in global
temperatures. And, as has been pointed out many times, the CO2 levels of that
period were only a fraction of what they are today and the rate of increase
was low. No one can say with any degree of confidence what caused that rise in
temperatures, but without it we would not be seeing the "record breaking"
temperatures of today. Does anyone have any idea as to what caused that early
20th century rise? Other than "the climate is always changing"?

>>

>> Following that rise, we see, from ca. 1940 through ca. 1979, first a sharp
dip in temperatures, and then a period of relative stability. Yet during this
period CO2 levels were rising sharply. And no, it's not enough to explain away
such an inconvenient result by invoking an array of various "forcings" that
appear to fix the problem. It's always possible to invoke all sorts of
complications to account for results that would otherwise falsify one's
theory. Which is why Occam's Razor is so important:

>>

>> "Though the principle may seem rather trivial, it is essential for model
building because of what is known as the "underdetermination of theories by
data". For a given set of observations or data, there is always an infinite
number of possible models explaining those same data."
(http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/OCCAMRAZ.html) Complications of this sort are often
referred to as "saving hypotheses," with the implication that any theory can
be "saved" from falsification by continuing to add complications until the
data appear to support the theory. The notion of confirmation bias can also be
invoked in this context.

>>

>> A similar issue arises when we attempt to evaluate the so-called "hiatus"
of the 21st century, where we clearly see a major slowdown in temperature
increase compared with the previous 20 years, during a period when CO2
emissions were soaring.

>>

>> If there is no clear correlation between CO2 and global temperatures then,
as it seems to me, it becomes extremely difficult to argue for CO2 as the
cause of the warmup we see over the last 100 years or so.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   24. 24

>>  
>>

>> Ruben says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 11:38 AM

>>

>> Thanks for the clear and concise post. The link to the coral paper is
formatted wrong.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   25. 25

>>  
>>

>> Hank Roberts says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 1:00 PM

>>

>> Doonesbury page today:

>>

>>> Say What?

>>>

>>> "You have indicated that Mars was totally different thousands of years
ago. Is it possible that there was a civilization on Mars thousands of years
ago?"  
>  \-- Rep. Dana Rohrabacher to NASA

>>  
>>                         >>                                   26. 26

>>  
>>

>> Russ Doty says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 1:17 PM

>>

>> Adam'S (#4) thought (that we are doomed) ignores acceptance of #1 (that we
can and are changing the climate). If you want to help, please check in with
and support the 80% renewable electricity by 2050 initiative for Montana at
http://www.mtcares.org . 26 of Montana's 56 counties and 5 of 7 Indian
reservations were just declared drought disaster areas. Thanks.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   27. 27

>>  
>>

>> generic commenter says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 1:54 PM

>>

>> Many middle aged and older people in the United States likely do not have a
good intuitive grasp of metric system measurements.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   28. 28

>>  
>>

>> imback says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 2:52 PM

>>

>> “People have always died!” And it is true: people have died even when other
humans were not at fault. So what can we conclude from that?

>>

>> A quick quiz

>>

>> Do you conclude…

>>

>> (1) that humans cannot murder other people?

>>

>> (2) that we do not know whether humans are to blame for murder?

>>

>> (3) that murder will not have any severe consequences?

>>

>> (4) that we cannot stop murder?

>>  
>>                         >>                                   29. 29

>>  
>>

>> Ed Davies says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 3:18 PM

>>

>> Re: (3), of course 15'000 years ago the place was a bit less crowded and
people were a bit more mobile so 120 metre sea-level rise was probably not
directly harmful to too many people. Still, it also would by its nature tend
to hide the archaeological record of its effects; I wonder what's not been
discovered in the Mediterranean, Doggerland and so on. Interesting
civilizations are often near coasts so maybe prehistory would be rethought if
such evidence was available.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   30. 30

>>  
>>

>> Phil Scadden says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 3:57 PM

>>

>> Wow Mack - stunning example of denier skills there. If you are still
scratching your head, you could try reading the WG1 report for clues -
especially the definition of forcing.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   31. 31

>>  
>>

>> Chris Snow says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 4:05 PM

>>

>> I've often wondered how those who forward "the climate has always changed"
line would react if they went to their doctor with a medical complaint and
were told "people have always got sick" and were sent on their way.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   32. 32

>>  
>>

>> tegiri nenashi says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 4:13 PM

>>

>> The issue here is trust. Whom do you trust more: some bureaucrat
"negotiating" for your benefit during Paris accord, or some humble researcher
working on artificial leaf (or an equivalent disruptive technology). That is
right, if you read the history correctly, mankind advances are due to
continuous flow of inventions, rather than political process. This climate
agreement has been designed by committee. Search any park in any city, you'll
find no statue of committee.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   33. 33

>>  
>>

>> CM says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 4:31 PM

>>

>> Yet another reason stefan so richly deserved the 2017 AGU Climate
Communication Prize. Congratulations.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   34. 34

>>  
>>

>> Mr. Know It All says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 5:18 PM

>>

>> It's perfectly logical to be skeptical of AGW since, as noted, the climate
HAS always changed.

>>

>> Probably less than 1% of people even in developed nations understand
exactly how AGW really works, so it is reasonable for them to be skeptical.
Yes, most know the story that CO2 inhibits the earth's radiation from
escaping, but few know why that is. It is not unreasonable to doubt things you
don't understand; particularly given the increasingly rejected globalist
political motivation by many on the left (scientists) as well as the constant
"correcting" of the scientific data and results; all reinforced by the
irrefutable knowledge that our average earth temperature estimates older than
100 years are suspect at best.

>>

>> It may even turn out that AGW is a good thing - maybe Yellowstone or a big
war will send a cooling layer of dust into the air, who knows. Not even Mr.
Know It All knows…….

>>  
>>                         >>                                   35. 35

>>  
>>

>> Robert Ingersol says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 6:20 PM

>>

>> Re:#1 by Tim C. The other aspect of the climate science deniers' strange
relationship with paleoclimatology is their belief that climate
reconstructions going back hundreds of millions of years are wonderfully
reliable but those going back 1000 of 2000 could not possibly be accurate.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   36. 36

>>  
>>

>> Mal Adapted says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 7:07 PM

>>

>> Mr. Ironically Anosognosic Typist:

>>

>>> It is not unreasonable to doubt things you don’t understand

>>

>> Mr. IAT does not explain why rather than reserving judgement until he
_does_ understand, _he_ leaps to the conclusion that anything _he_ doesn 't
understand must be _intentionally deceptive_.

>>

>> Mr. IAT goes on to say:

>>

>>> particularly given the increasingly rejected globalist political
motivation by many on the left (scientists) as well as the constant
“correcting” of the scientific data and results;

>>

>> Here, Mr. IAT makes further explicit or implicit claims:

>>

>> 1) He proclaims it 'given' that 'many on the left' (including 'scientists'
as a class), have a 'globalist political motivation'.

>>

>> 2) He asserts that scientific data on climate are being constantly
'corrected', with the unsubtle implication that it's being done by climate
scientists for dishonest reasons (perhaps that 'globalist political
motivation'?);

>>

>> 3) He rashly states it's 'irrefutable' (heh!) that estimates of GMST more
than 100 years in the past are 'suspect at best', apparently implying that
estimates of GMST up to 99 years in the past are more trustworthy.

>>

>> Can anyone say what's truly ironic about Mr. IAT's comment? That's right:
_none_ of his **risible notions** are _supported by evidence_! Can Mr. In Over
His Head _really not see_ that his **opinions about AGW** are largely, if not
entirely, **informed by conspiracism**? Isn 't he being perfectly _illogical_?
Ha ha hah, how ironic 8^D!

>>  
>>                         >>                                   37. 37

>>  
>>

>> Mark Arnest says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 7:17 PM

>>

>> When you go to the emergency room with a gunshot wound, you don't want the
doctor wasting a lot of time interviewing you about the possibility of
hemophilia in your family. Yes, people bled to death before guns were
invented; but you, right now, are bleeding to death from a gunshot wound. It's
the same with natural climate change versus our current climate change. And
yet for some people, the argument has talismanic power. That power is not
intellectual, but emotional.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   38. 38

>>  
>>

>> patrick says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 7:26 PM

>>

>> "Senator, you said something that caught my attention in your remarks, that
the person who had become a sceptic, a converted sceptic-you said that he made
the statement that global warming was 100% due to human activity. I don't
believe that. One hundred percent? Every bit of that global warming? I don't
buy it." -Rick Perry (4:15-5:43)

>>

>> https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lFIMHyPxIpo

>>

>> Rick Perry is in need of particular help on attribution and the science of
positive and negative forcings. Would someone please help him? Really. Maybe
he can't be helped, but maybe he can.

>>

>> (I regret the third and fourth words in the title of this clip. They're
silly in any case, and mistaken in the event, I think.)

>>  
>>                         >>                                   39. 39

>>  
>>

>> nigelj says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 7:27 PM

>>

>> Victor @23

>>

>> The warming period from about 1920 - 1950 has been attributed to a
combination of greenhouse gases (which were increasing through the period to
some extent), solar changes, and unusually low volcanic activity. Its hard to
be precise on proportions, because records are limited, but all have played a
role.

>>

>> The flat period from about 1950 - 1970 is believed to be due to polluting
particulate emissions from the proliferation of industry after WW2 with the
revolution in consumer goods. This was before things were eventually cleaned
up. These emissions counter acted rising CO2 levels.

>>

>> The warming period from about 1970 to currently has been over 90%
attributed to greenhouse gases, because solar activity has been low over this
period.

>>

>> It's necessary to remember solar changes are known to have limited effects
on warming maximising out at less than half a degree. They can explain some
warming early last century, but cannot explain total 20th century warming.

>>

>> So while the correlation between CO2 and temperature since 1900 isn't
perfect visually looking at a graph, there are totally adequate explanations
of why.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   40. 40

>>  
>>

>> patrick says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 7:27 PM

>>

>> # 21 Bernie Thomas > 5) Before mankind, all climate change was from natural

>>

>> causes.

>>

>> And what do you conclude from that?

>>  
>>                         >>                                   41. 41

>>  
>>

>> nigelj says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 7:56 PM

>>

>> Excellent points in the article, and clear explanations, and all are viable
factors.

>>

>> I think a lot of climate denialists may simply be saying climate changed
before, and humanity survived, so we will survive if it changes again,
whatever may be the cause. Listening to people I think this is a bigger factor
than we probably realise.

>>

>> It's a sort of fatalistic sort of thinking, or a simplification, and
obviously naive and missing the potential dangers, and a bit dumb, but could
be quite widespread. People simplify, because they find the whole issue huge
and hard to grasp.

>>

>> In fact previous climate warming after the last ice age did have
significant negative impacts on early human settlements (evidence of periods
of significant and rapid regional sea level rise). The book "After The Ice"
documents some of this. And obviously greenhouse gas warming could be much
more rapid and destructive.

>>

>> Humans are also mostly hardwired to respond to immediate threats with an
adrenalin rush and considerable focus. We are not hardwired by evolution to
consider long term threats too well, people like Steven Hawking are possibly
different in this respect, and others on this website. Human psychology, and
related individual differences, are possibly factors in denial, but clearly
not the only ones.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   42. 42

>>  
>>

>> Mal Adapted says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 8:38 PM

>>

>> I'd like to clarify my previous comment for newcomers to RC:

>>

>> Rather than 'leaping to the conclusion' that any climate science he doesn't
understand must be deceptive, 'Mr. Know It All' appeared on RC about a year
ago with that conviction already firm in his mind. IOW, he evinced
_conspiracist ideation_ ( 'CI'), as identified by psychologist Stephan
Lewandowsky in Recurrent Fury: Conspiratorial Discourse in the Blogosphere
Triggered by Research on the Role of Conspiracist Ideation in Climate Denial.

>>

>> Dr. Lewandowsky's peer-reviewed research provoked predictable responses
from members of his study population. Another characteristic of CI is 'self-
sealing': any suggestion that a fervently-held conspiracy theory is incorrect,
or any evidence that supports a non-sinister alternative hypothesis, is itself
evidence for the conspiracy!

>>

>> It's unclear why 'Mr. Know It All' apparently already knows all he wants to
know; however, his hostility toward 'leftists' and 'globalists' is
transparent, as if he lies sleepless each night for fear of the crowd of
leftist monsters under his bed! It's likely he's here solely to forestall any
imaginable political gain by his cultural enemies.

>>

>> In any case, evidence-based RC participants have just about given up hope
for unsealing the mind of 'Mr. Hasn't Got A Clue'. My own responses to him,
while I work to make them substantive, are as _impolite_ as I can bring myself
to be, in hopes he 'll seek welcome elsewhere rather than repeatedly
disrupting worthwhile discussion here; although thankfully, perhaps, it's not
up to me to decide who comments here and who doesn't 8^}!

>>  
>>                         >>                                   43. 43

>>  
>>

>> Dan DaSilva says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:23 PM

>>

>> "The climate has always changed."

>>

>> This fact along with other observations allows you to conclude:

>>

>> (5) that humans may not be changing the climate as much as some arrogant
climate scientists desperately want you to beleive.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   44. 44

>>  
>>

>> Keith Woollard says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:33 PM

>>

>> OK, let me start with a full disclosure… I am a geophysicist, all my income
for my 30 years of professional life has come directly or indirectly from the
oil and gas industry. I am therefore a shrill of big oil and my opinion is
worthless.  
>  Having said that, it also means I understand quite a bit about climate
change because without it I would not have a job, there would be no
(commercial) hydrocarbon deposits anywhere in the world.

>>

>> The premise of Stefan’s post is innocuous enough. It sounds like an
argument a sceptic might put forward, but it isn’t really. Not one of the 4
options is a typical conclusion from a sceptical argument. Most often the
“climates have always changed” gets used to refute ridiculous graphs that join
low frequency, averaged paleoclimate reconstructions with modern high
frequency instrument records. Or when people talk about a “stable” climate for
the last 11,000 years.

>>

>> The one thing you learn in Geology 101, and the thing that made geology a
science (well almost anyway, speaking as a geophysicist) is the realisation
that processes that formed the lithological record are the same now as they
were in the past. Before that people used to think that mountains and rivers
and coasts all formed ages ago and what we see now is static and “ideal”. This
is the same concept that people fight against when climate activists talk
about the mythical “pre-industrial climate”. The real poster child for me was
Obama’s visit to the Exit Glacier which shows the glacier retreating since
1850.  
>  The reason I would use “the climate always changes” as an argument is to
say that the earth’s climate is a very complex beast that we are just
scratching on the edges. Explain the past with your simplistic CO2-drives-
everything model and I will trust you. I am not talking about major P-T
transitions or ice ages from solar cycles, explain to me finely interbedded
sand-shale sequences.

>>

>> …. and don’t listen to people like Alastair@18 try and explain geology !!

>>  
>>                         >>                                   45. 45

>>  
>>

>> Night-Gaunt49 says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 10:36 PM

>>

>> This is certainly not just the science but in fact psychology and ideology
that these deniers immune from facts. As has been shown as the facts become
clearer and more pronounced they will not change their minds, they will harden
and become more entrenched. But we should never stop since it is for those who
are not hard liners who have not made climate and our energy sources political
footballs. Indeed the possible remedies are considered "Liberal" by the
opposition which are Republicans an Libertarians who stay in their safe zones
and dismiss the idea we have to change our lives fully. To them it is
something they consider a defeat that they will believe to be like war. If the
Liberals and Left say this needs to be done they will design and build coal
powered cars an trucks to piss them off and other nonsense.

>>

>> I come here to get the science. I was at that Coldist site. I even told
them that for their little area when the thermal current stops, they will get
cold while most of the Earth will heat up. To them they see it only getting
colder by carefully picking out only things that represent it getting colder
while ignoring the greater amount of warming.

>>

>> They have money to make or just identify with the Fossil Fuel Industries.
It has become ideological to them. Our present fossil fuel use even more so in
the past are what they consider normal, natural and dare I say "American". To
them eating meat is macho and if you stress greens it is feminine and weak and
flabby and Gay. I am not sure just what can be done for them to think it over
and change their minds. Even if it was 2050 while the Antarctic is getting low
on ice and greening nicely, they would not recognize it. One cannot deal
rationally with the irrational and proud of it.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   46. 46

>>  
>>

>> bjchip says:

>>

>> 20 Jul 2017 at 11:30 PM

>>

>> Actually, there is not even a requirement to look at data in this case. The
ARGUMENT that we can draw a conclusion is logically flawed. The formal logic
problem precludes ANY conclusion based on the argument of the form X has
always happened therefore we cannot be causing X.

>>

>> I believe that this is the undistributed middle.

>>

>> This should I think, be pointed out even before we present data. The
argument is illogical.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   47. 47

>>  
>>

>> Mack says:

>>

>> 21 Jul 2017 at 2:48 AM

>>

>> @ Phil Scadden #30  
>  "- especially the definition of forcing"  
>  Yes, Phil, I was talking to David Appel about the definition of "Radiative
forcing"…since he accepted the definition from Wikipedia.  
>  Here is the comment…  
>  http://www.drroyspencer.com/2016/03/comments-on-new-rss-v4-pause-busting-
global-temperature-dataset/#comment-212233  
>  If you now go to Wikipedia and look up the definition of "Radiative
Forcing" you will notice that the wording has now changed ..so that the first
sentence has been eliminated.  
>  Seems that the dishonest alarmist running Wiki, was a little embarrassed.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   48. 48

>>  
>>

>> Thomas says:

>>

>> 21 Jul 2017 at 3:21 AM

>>

>> 16 John asks: _" But what non-human causes produced the high levels of CO2
in past times that caused hot periods with much higher sea levels?"_

>>

>> It's called Paleo-Climatology John, as mentioned in the article. Try this
on for size when you have a spare 5 minutes or hour to spend.  
>  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HP_Fvs48hb4&feature=youtu.be&t=33m1s

>>

>> Google is your friend (kind of - depends on how one uses it)

>>

>> fwiw I think Stefan's excellent article can be summarised in one of his
sentences:  
>  **" The evidence for the human cause of global warming is overwhelming."**

>>  
>>                         >>                                   49. 49

>>  
>>

>> Thomas says:

>>

>> 21 Jul 2017 at 3:58 AM

>>

>> It's well to ignore the ignorance of VICTOR @23 SOP. (sigh) However, for
the benefit of others….

>>

>> _" The amount of solar radiation passing through Earth's atmosphere and
reaching the ground globally peaked in the 1930s, substantially decreased from
the 1940s to the 1970s, and changed little after that, a new study has found._  
>  Read more at: https://phys.org/news/2013-08-solar-clues-20th-century-
global.html

>>

>> GO READ SOME CLIMATE SCIENCE VICTOR~!!! such as

>>

>> _" After rising rapidly during the first part of the 20th century, global
average temperatures did cool by about 0.2°C after 1940 and remained low until
1970, after which they began to climb rapidly again.

>>

>> The mid-century cooling appears to have been **largely due to a high
concentration of sulphate aerosols in the atmosphere, emitted by industrial
activities and volcanic eruptions.** Sulphate aerosols have a cooling effect
on the climate because they scatter light from the Sun, reflecting its energy
back out into space.

>>

>> The rise in sulphate aerosols was **largely due to the increase in
industrial activities at the end of the second world war.** In addition, the
large eruption of Mount Agung in 1963 produced aerosols which cooled the lower
atmosphere by **about 0.5°C, while solar activity levelled off after
increasing at the beginning of the century.**

>>

>> The clean air acts introduced in Europe and North America reduced emissions
of sulphate aerosols. As levels fell in the atmosphere, their cooling effect
was soon outweighed by the warming effect of the steadily rising levels of
greenhouse gases."_  
>  https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn11639-climate-myths-the-cooling-
after-1940-shows-co2-does-not-cause-warming/

>>

>> Besides that, CO2 emissions increased 19 fold from 1850 to 1930 Victor - if
you want to believe that had NO IMPACT in post-1930 temps (even after 1945
cooling period) then you're a fool. But I knew that already. A shameful thing
that you do not. (sigh)  
>  http://www.wri.org/blog/2014/05/history-carbon-dioxide-emissions

>>

>> as to your _" superior critical thinking skills"_ and climate science
knowledge … I'm ROTFLMAO

>>  
>>                         >>                                   50. 50

>>  
>>

>> nigelj says:

>>

>> 21 Jul 2017 at 4:12 AM

>>

>> Night-Gaunt49 @ 45:

>>

>> Very true. Of course we have probably all had at least some scepticism of
aspects of climate science, but we examine these things, and realise the flaws
in denier myths and move on.

>>

>> I would say virtually all "long term" climate denialists are probably
driven by political, psychological, or vested interest motives, or similar
motives. And turning them around is hard work, like pulling teeth. Some have
their power and wealth invested in fossil fuels and will hold on tight,
regardless of consequences on other people.

>>

>> They chant denier myths a mantra, but probably don't really believe them.
Or maybe they grow to believe their own propoganda. The human mind is good at
fooling itself. Worse still none of us are completely immune from this.

>>

>> 1 2 3 … 5 Next »

>>

>> Site Google Custom Search

>>

>> ![Scientific American Science and Technology Awards

2005](/images/2005scitechwebawards.gif)

>>

>> ![Zvon.org guide to RC](/images/zvon.gif)

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Recent
Comments

>>  
>>                                     * **Unforced Variations: June 2019:**
manyandvaried

>>  
>>                                     * **Unforced Variations: June 2019:**
Mr. Know It All

>>  
>>                                     * **Unforced Variations: June 2019:**
Killian

>>  
>>                                     * **Unforced Variations: June 2019:**
nigelj

>>  
>>                                     * **Forced responses: May 2019:** Al
Bundy

>>  
>>                                     * **Forced responses: May 2019:** Al
Bundy

>>  
>>                                     * **Forced responses: May 2019:** Al
Bundy

>>  
>>                                     * **Unforced Variations: June 2019:**
Fred Magyar

>>  
>>                                     * **Forced responses: May 2019:** Kevin
McKinney

>>  
>>                                     * **Forced responses: May 2019:** Kevin
McKinney

>>  
>>                                   * ...With Inline Responses

>>  
>>                                     * **﻿First successful model simulation
of the past 3 million

>>  
>>

>> years of climate change:** Dan DaSilva

>>  
>>                         >>                                     * **﻿First
successful model simulation of the past 3 million

>>  
>>

>> years of climate change:** Supernaut

>>  
>>                         >>                                     * **Unforced
variations: Mar 2019:** TPaine

>>  
>>                                     * **Unforced variations: Mar 2019:**
SecularAnimist

>>  
>>                                     * **Unforced variations: Mar 2019:**
Snape

>>  
>>                                     * **Unforced variations: Mar 2019:**
Nick

>>  
>>                                     * **The Climate Scientists are
Alright:** Uli

>>  
>>                                     * **Unforced variations: Mar 2019:**
Killian

>>  
>>                                     * **The best case for worst case
scenarios:** Kent Peacock

>>  
>>                                     * **The Climate Scientists are
Alright:** Uli

>>  
>>                                   *               * Pages

>>  
>>                                     * Acronym index

>>  
>>                                     * Climate model projections compared to
observations

>>  
>>                                     * Data Sources

>>  
>>                                     * Privacy Policy

>>  
>>                                   * Categories

>>  
>>                                     * Climate Science

>>  
>>                                       * Aerosols

>>  
>>                                       * Arctic and Antarctic

>>  
>>                                       * Carbon cycle

>>  
>>                                       * Climate impacts

>>  
>>                                       * Climate modelling

>>  
>>                                       * El Nino

>>  
>>                                       * Geoengineering

>>  
>>                                       * Greenhouse gases

>>  
>>                                       * Hurricanes

>>  
>>                                       * Instrumental Record

>>  
>>                                       * IPCC

>>  
>>                                       * Oceans

>>  
>>                                       * Paleoclimate

>>  
>>                                       * Sun-earth connections

>>  
>>                                     * Communicating Climate

>>  
>>                                       * Climate conference report

>>  
>>                                       * climate services

>>  
>>                                       * Reporting on climate

>>  
>>                                       * skeptics

>>  
>>                                     * downscaling

>>  
>>                                     * Extras

>>  
>>                                       * Attic

>>  
>>                                       * Comment Policy

>>  
>>                                       * Contributor Bio's

>>  
>>                                       * FAQ

>>  
>>                                       * Glossary

>>  
>>                                       * In the News

>>  
>>                                       * Reviews

>>  
>>                                       * Supplemental data

>>  
>>                                       * Tutorials

>>  
>>                                     * heatwaves

>>  
>>                                     * hydrological cycle

>>  
>>                                     * Open thread

>>  
>>                                     * RC Forum

>>  
>>                                     * Scientific practice

>>  
>>                                     * Solutions

>>  
>>                                     * statistics

>>  
>>                                     * The Bore Hole

>>  
>>                                     * The Crank Shaft

>>  
>>                                   * Books

>>  
>>

>> ![Our books](/images/books.gif)

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Contributors

>>  
>>                                   * ## Highlights

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Dummies Guide to the latest 'Hockey
Stick' controversy

>>  
>>                                     * El Nino, Global Warming, and
Anomalous U.S. Winter Warmth

>>  
>>                                     * Hurricanes and Global Warming

>>  
>>                                     * Myth vs. Fact Regarding the "Hockey
Stick"

>>  
>>                                     * On attribution

>>  
>>                                     * On mismatches between models and
observations

>>  
>>                                     * On Sensitivity (Part I)

>>  
>>                                     * Tropical Glacier Retreat

>>  
>>                                     * Water Vapour: feedback or forcing?

>>  
>>                                     * Welcome to RealClimate

>>  
>>                                   * ## Other Opinions

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * A Few Things Ill Considered

>>  
>>                                     * Accuweather Climate Blog

>>  
>>                                     * And Then There's Physics

>>  
>>                                     * Andrew Dessler

>>  
>>                                     * Brave New Climate

>>  
>>                                     * C2ES

>>  
>>                                     * Christian Science Monitor

>>  
>>                                     * Climate Change Education

>>  
>>                                     * Climate Communication

>>  
>>                                     * Climate Matters@Columbia

>>  
>>                                     * Climate Science Watch

>>  
>>                                     * ClimateArk

>>  
>>                                     * ClimateConservative.Org

>>  
>>                                     * Climatedenial.org

>>  
>>                                     * ClimatePhys

>>  
>>                                     * ClimateProgress

>>  
>>                                     * ClimateSight

>>  
>>                                     * Cntr. for Enviro. Journalism

>>  
>>                                     * Deep Climate

>>  
>>                                     * Deltoid

>>  
>>                                     * deSmogBlog

>>  
>>                                     * DotEarth

>>  
>>                                     * Earth @ Discovery Channel

>>  
>>                                     * Ecologically Orientated

>>  
>>                                     * Effets de Terre (FR)

>>  
>>                                     * George Monbiot

>>  
>>                                     * globalchange

>>  
>>                                     * Grist: Climate and Energy

>>  
>>                                     * Horatio Algeranon

>>  
>>                                     * Hot Topic

>>  
>>                                     * HotWhopper

>>  
>>                                     * James' Empty Blog

>>  
>>                                     * Jeff Masters' Wunder Blog

>>  
>>                                     * John Fleck

>>  
>>                                     * Kate has things to say

>>  
>>                                     * Maribo

>>  
>>                                     * Mark Lynas

>>  
>>                                     * Neven's Arctic Sea Ice Blog

>>  
>>                                     * Open Mind

>>  
>>                                     * Our Changing Climate

>>  
>>                                     * Planet 3.0

>>  
>>                                     * PrimaKlima (DE)

>>  
>>                                     * PSU Ethics/Climate

>>  
>>                                     * Rabett Run

>>  
>>                                     * RealClimateEconomics

>>  
>>                                     * Republicans for Environmental
Protection

>>  
>>                                     * Robert Grumbine

>>  
>>                                     * Sci. Journalism Tracker

>>  
>>                                     * SciDev.Net

>>  
>>                                     * Scitizen

>>  
>>                                     * SkepticalScience

>>  
>>                                     * Stephen Schneider

>>  
>>                                     * Stoat

>>  
>>                                     * The Benshi

>>  
>>                                     * The Carbon Brief

>>  
>>                                     * The Climate Project

>>  
>>                                     * The Global Warming Debate

>>  
>>                                     * The Heat is Online

>>  
>>                                     * What on Earth Comic Strip (Archive)

>>  
>>                                     * What's up with that Watts

>>  
>>                                     * World View of Glob.Warm.

>>  
>>                                     * Yale Climate Media Forum

>>  
>>                                   * ## Science Links

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * AIP:Discovery of Glob. Warm.

>>  
>>                                     * AMS Env. Science

>>  
>>                                     * Central Coast Climate Science
Education

>>  
>>                                     * Climate Data Links

>>  
>>                                     * ClimateEducation.net

>>  
>>                                     * ClimatePrediction.net

>>  
>>                                     * Columbia Earth Inst.

>>  
>>                                     * EdGCM

>>  
>>                                     * EPA Climate Change

>>  
>>                                     * ESPERE

>>  
>>                                     * Inst. Pierre Simon Laplace

>>  
>>                                     * IPCC Facts

>>  
>>                                     * IPCC Reports

>>  
>>                                     * NOAA Paleoclimatology

>>  
>>                                     * Pacific Institute for Climate
Solutions

>>  
>>                                     * PAGES

>>  
>>                                     * Penn State Inst. Env.

>>  
>>                                     * PodClimate

>>  
>>                                     * Sci. Am. Observations

>>  
>>                                     * Scripps Insitute of Oceanography

>>  
>>                                     * WMO

>>  
>>                                   * Translations

>>  
>>                                     * (availability denoted by flag icons)

>>  
>>                                   * Email Notification

>>  
>>                                     * Enter your e-mail address to receive
notifications when

>>  
>>

>> there are new posts.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Meta

>>  
>>                                     * Login

>>  
>>                                     * RSS 2.0

>>  
>>                                     * Comments RSS 2.0

>>  
>>                                     * Valid XHTML

>>  
>>

>> Mathematical notation provided by QuickLatex

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> Powered by **WordPress**

>>

>> 7ads6x98y

>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow _[↓]:
Down Arrow_ [XHTML]: eXtensible HyperText Markup Language

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow
  *[XHTML]: eXtensible HyperText Markup Language

