
>

> ﻿

>

>> This field is mandatory!

>>

>> Greenpeace

>>

>> Greenpeace East Asia

>>

>> Select a website International (English) ----------- Africa - Congo
(Français) Africa - Senegal (Français) Africa - South Africa (English) Arabic
(العربية) Argentina (Español) Australia (English) Austria (Deutsch) Belgium
(Nederlands/Français) Brazil (Portugues) Bulgaria (български) Canada
(English/Français) Chile (Español) China Mainland (简体中文) Colombia (Español)
Croatia (Hrvatski) Czech Republic (Česky) Denmark (Dansk) East Asia (English)
European Union (English) Fiji (English) Finland (Suomea) France (Français)
Germany (Deutsch) Greece (Ελληνικά) Greenland (Kalaallisut/Dansk) Hong Kong
(繁體中文) Hungary (Magyar) India (English/Hindi) Indonesia (Indonesia) Israel
(עברית) Italy (Italiano) Japan (日本語) Korea (한국어) Luxembourg (Français) Malta
(English) Mexico (Español) Netherlands (Nederlands) New Zealand (English)
Norway (Norsk) Papua New Guinea (English) Peru (Español) Philippines (English)
Poland (Polska) Portugal (Portugues) Romania (Roman) Russia (Русский) Slovakia
(Slovenčina) Slovenia (Slovenjia) Southeast Asia (English) Spain (Español)
Sweden (Svenska) Switzerland (Deutsch) Switzerland (Français) Taiwan (正體中文)
Thailand (ไทย) Turkey (Turk) United Kingdom (English) USA (English)

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * [香港繁體]

>>  
>>                                   * [中国大陆简体]

>>  
>>                                   * [台灣正體]

>>  
>>                                   * [한국어]

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * Home

>>  
>>                                   * Donate

>>  
>>                                   * About Us

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Mission & Values

>>  
>>                                     * History

>>  
>>                                     * Achievements

>>  
>>                                     * Greenpeace Structure

>>  
>>                                       * Greenpeace East Asia

>>  
>>                                       * Greenpeace International

>>  
>>                                     * Ships

>>  
>>                                       * The Rainbow Warrior

>>  
>>                                       * The Esperanza

>>  
>>                                       * The Arctic Sunrise

>>  
>>                                       * The Argus

>>  
>>                                       * Our Inflatables

>>  
>>                                       * The Greenpeace Balloon

>>  
>>                                       * Ship webcams

>>  
>>                                     * Jobs

>>  
>>                                       * Fundraising Director (...

>>  
>>                                       * Senior IT Specialist ...

>>  
>>                                       * Head of EDO and Intern...

>>  
>>                                       * Forest Campaigner-Beij...

>>  
>>                                       * Ocean Campaigner-Beiji...

>>  
>>                                       * Senior Project Account...

>>  
>>                                       * Senior Communications ...

>>  
>>                                       * Communication Officer ...

>>  
>>                                       * Forests Campaigner(Ful...

>>  
>>                                       * Senior Researcher - Be...

>>  
>>                                       * Junior Accountant (Ful...

>>  
>>                                       * Data Analytics Special...

>>  
>>                                       * Food & Agriculture Cam...

>>  
>>                                       * Toxics Campaigner(Full...

>>  
>>                                       * Public Networking Offi...

>>  
>>                                       * Climate & Energy Campa...

>>  
>>                                     * Annual Reports

>>  
>>                                     * FAQs

>>  
>>                                     * Contact Us

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * What We Do

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Climate & Energy

>>  
>>                                       * The Problems

>>  
>>                                       * The Science

>>  
>>                                       * The Solutions

>>  
>>                                       * What We Do

>>  
>>                                       * What You Can Do

>>  
>>                                     * Reduce Air Pollution

>>  
>>                                       * The Problem and Impact...

>>  
>>                                       * The Solutions

>>  
>>                                       * What We Do

>>  
>>                                       * What You Can Do

>>  
>>                                     * Eliminate Toxic Chemicals

>>  
>>                                       * The Problems

>>  
>>                                       * The Science

>>  
>>                                       * The Solutions

>>  
>>                                       * What We Do

>>  
>>                                       * What You Can Do

>>  
>>                                     * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                                       * The Problems

>>  
>>                                       * The Science

>>  
>>                                       * The Solutions

>>  
>>                                       * What We Do

>>  
>>                                       * What You Can Do

>>  
>>                                     * Protect Forests

>>  
>>                                       * The Problems

>>  
>>                                       * The Science

>>  
>>                                       * The Solutions

>>  
>>                                       * What We Do

>>  
>>                                       * What You Can Do

>>  
>>                                     * Defending Our Oceans

>>  
>>                                       * The Problems

>>  
>>                                       * The Solutions

>>  
>>                                       * What We Do

>>  
>>                                       * What You Can Do

>>  
>>                                     * Our Actions

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * News

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Features

>>  
>>                                       * About Us

>>  
>>                                       * Climate & Energy

>>  
>>                                       * Toxics

>>  
>>                                       * Oceans

>>  
>>                                       * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                                       * Forests

>>  
>>                                       * Others

>>  
>>                                     * Blog

>>  
>>                                     * Publications

>>  
>>                                     * Press Releases

>>  
>>                                     * Special Features

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * Multimedia

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Photos

>>  
>>                                       * About Us

>>  
>>                                       * Climate & Energy

>>  
>>                                       * Toxics

>>  
>>                                       * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                                       * Forests

>>  
>>                                       * Oceans

>>  
>>                                       * Others

>>  
>>                                     * Slideshows

>>  
>>                                       * About us

>>  
>>                                       * Climate & Energy

>>  
>>                                       * Toxics

>>  
>>                                       * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                                       * Forests

>>  
>>                                       * Oceans

>>  
>>                                       * Others

>>  
>>                                     * Ship Webcams

>>  
>>                                     * Videos

>>  
>>                                       * About us

>>  
>>                                       * Climate & Energy

>>  
>>                                       * Air Pollution

>>  
>>                                       * Toxics

>>  
>>                                       * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                                       * Forests

>>  
>>                                       * Oceans

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * Get Involved

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Defend Peaceful Protest

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * Members

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Become a Member

>>  
>>                                     * Member's Benefits

>>  
>>                                       * Member's Discounts

>>  
>>                                     * Annual Reports

>>  
>>                                     * Impact Reports

>>  
>>                                     * FAQs

>>  
>>                                     * Contact Us

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * Sign in

>>  
>>                                   * New here?  Sign up!

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * Home

>>  
>>                                   * About Us

>>  
>>                                   * Mission & Values

>>  
>>

>> Email

>>

>> Share

>>

>> # Mission & Values

>>

>> On this page

>>

>> Standard Page - 2011-06-01

>>

>> Greenpeace is an independent, nonprofit, global campaigning organization
that uses non-violent, creative confrontation to expose global environmental
problems and their causes.

>>

>> Greenpeace is an independent, nonprofit, global campaigning organization
that uses non-violent, creative confrontation to expose global environmental
problems and their causes.

>>

>> Greenpeace’s goal is to ensure the ability of Earth to nurture life in all
its diversity.

>>

>> Greenpeace stands for positive change through action to defend the natural
world and promote peace. We investigate, expose and confront environmental
abuse by governments and corporations around the world. We champion
environmentally responsible and socially just solutions, including scientific
and technological innovation.

>>

>> Greenpeace's cornerstone principles and core values are reflected in all
our environmental campaign work, worldwide. These are:

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * **Positive
action:** We use creative, non-violent

>>  
>>

>> confrontation to raise the level and quality of public debate.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * **Global:**
Nature recognises no frontiers or national

>>  
>>

>> boundaries. GPEA is part of a global organization. We address cross-border
environmental challenges and leverage global intelligence and resources.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
**Credible:** We are a credible organization that deploys

>>  
>>

>> independent investigation, research and actions to highlight environmental
problems as well as solutions.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
**Independence:** We ensure our financial independence from

>>  
>>

>> political or commercial interests. Greenpeace does not solicit or accept
funding from governments, corporations or political parties. Greenpeace
neither seeks nor accepts donations that could compromise its independence,
aims, objectives or integrity. Individual supporters and foundations are our
only source of financial support.

>>

>> ## What we do

>>

>> We seek solutions for, and promote open, informed debate about society's
environmental choices. In developing our campaign strategies and policies we
take great care to reflect our fundamental respect for democratic principles
and to seek solutions that will promote global social equity.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * We
investigate and expose environmental crimes, such as

>>  
>>

>> illegal logging in the Paradise Forests.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * We work with
scientists to conduct scientific research.

>>  
>>                                   * We document environmental problems,
such as toxic pollution

>>  
>>

>> or the signs of climate change.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * We lobby
governments and industries and take part in global

>>  
>>

>> negotiations.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * We take
creative, non-violent actions.

>>  
>>                                   * We seek out and promote sustainable
solutions for our

>>  
>>

>> environmental problems.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * We educate
and engage the public

>>  
>>

>> ## Our goals

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Protect
biodiversity in all its forms.

>>  
>>                                   * Prevent pollution and abuse of our
oceans, land, air and

>>  
>>

>> water.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * End nuclear
threats.

>>  
>>                                   * Promote peace and global disarmament.

>>  
>>

>> **Categories**

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * about us

>>  
>>

>> **Tags**

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * about us

>>  
>>

>> Next

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Home

>>  
>>                                     * Donate

>>  
>>                                     * About Us

>>  
>>                                       * Mission & Values

>>  
>>                                       * History

>>  
>>                                       * Achievements

>>  
>>                                       * Greenpeace Structure

>>  
>>                                       * Ships

>>  
>>                                       * Jobs

>>  
>>                                       * Annual Reports

>>  
>>                                       * FAQs

>>  
>>                                       * Contact Us

>>  
>>                                     * What We Do

>>  
>>                                     * News

>>  
>>                                     * Multimedia

>>  
>>                                     * Get Involved

>>  
>>                                     * Members

>>  
>>

>> QUICK DONATE

>>

>> ### Follow us on...

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
![](https://www.greenpeace.org/archive-

>>  
>>

>> international/PageFiles/33509/facebook.png)

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
![](https://www.greenpeace.org/archive-

>>  
>>

>> international/PageFiles/33509/twitter.png)

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
![](/archive-international/PageFiles/33509/rss_icon_48.jpg)

>>  
>>                                   * ![](/archive-
international/PageFiles/33509/youtube.png)

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * #### Greenpeace online

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Facebook

>>  
>>                                     * Twitter

>>  
>>                                     * YouTube

>>  
>>                                   * #### About us

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Introduction

>>  
>>                                     * Victories

>>  
>>                                     * Ships

>>  
>>                                     * Frequently Asked Questions

>>  
>>                                     * Jobs

>>  
>>                                   * #### What we do

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Climate Change

>>  
>>                                     * Air Pollution

>>  
>>                                     * Toxics

>>  
>>                                     * Food & Agriculture

>>  
>>                                     * Forests

>>  
>>                                     * Oceans

>>  
>>                                   * #### National and regional websites in
English

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Africa

>>  
>>                                     * Australia

>>  
>>                                     * Canada

>>  
>>                                     * East Asia

>>  
>>                                     * European Union

>>  
>>                                     * India

>>  
>>                                     * International

>>  
>>                                     * New Zealand

>>  
>>                                     * Southeast Asia

>>  
>>                                     * United Kingdom

>>  
>>                                     * United States

>>  
>>                                   *                 * More Greenpeace
offices around the world

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                   * #### Member's Area

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                     * Become a member

>>  
>>                                     * Member's benefits

>>  
>>                                     * E-magazines

>>  
>>                                     * Donor FAQs

>>  
>>                                     * Donor services

>>  
>>                                     * #### Media/Press

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                       * Press centre

>>  
>>                                       * Blogs & Features

>>  
>>                                       * Photos & Videos

>>  
>>                                       * Publications

>>  
>>                                     * #### Support Us

>>  
>>  
>>  
>>                                       * Online donation

>>  
>>                                       * Other ways to give

>>  
>>

>> **Facts & Figures**

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Founded in
1971.

>>  
>>                                   * Three ships in the oceans.

>>  
>>                                   * Offices in 40 countries.

>>  
>>                                   * Millions of supporters world-wide.

>>  
>>

>> Become a supporter too!

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * **Rainbow
Warrior** sailing vessel,

>>  
>>

>> active since 1989.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * **Arctic
Sunrise** ice breaker,

>>  
>>

>> active since 1997.

>>  
>>                         >>                                   *
**Esperanza** means "Hope",

>>  
>>

>> active since 2002.

>>

>> © 2012 **GREENPEACE**

>>  
>>                         >>                                   * Privacy
Policy and Collection of Personal Data

>>  
>>                                   * Copyright

>>  
>>                                   * Sitemap

>>  
>>                                   * Mobile version

>>  
>>                                   * Home

>>  
>>                                   * About us

>>  
>>                                   * Contact us

>>  
>>                                   * Press centre

>>  
>

> _[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200_ [c.]: circa _[ c.]:
circa_ [RSS]: Really Simple Syndication _[C.]: Century_ [m.]: married _[FT]:
Financial Times_ [ _]: required_ [MB]: megabytes _[UV]: Ultraviolet_ [ UV]:
Ultraviolet _[cf]: confer_ [NG]: National Geographic _[DOI]: digital object
identifier_ [C]: degrees Celsius _[F]: degrees Fahrenheit_ [↑]: Up Arrow _[↓]:
Down Arrow_ [XHTML]: eXtensible HyperText Markup Language

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200
  *[c.]: circa
  *[ c.]: circa
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication
  *[C.]: Century
  *[m.]: married
  *[FT]: Financial Times
  *[*]: required
  *[MB]: megabytes
  *[UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[ UV]: Ultraviolet
  *[cf]: confer
  *[NG]: National Geographic
  *[DOI]: digital object identifier
  *[C]: degrees Celsius
  *[F]: degrees Fahrenheit
  *[↑]: Up Arrow
  *[↓]: Down Arrow
  *[XHTML]: eXtensible HyperText Markup Language

