

# Patrick J. Michaels - funding

From SourceWatch

Jump to: navigation, search

_Calved from mainPatrick J. Michaels page._

## Contents

  * 1 Funding
    * 1.1 Sources of funding
    * 1.1.1 In 2011, Waxman call for inquiry
    * 1.1.2 Statements by Michaels on funding sources
      * 1.1.2.1 In 2002: "the vast majority [of my funding] comes from taxpayer-supported entities"
      * 1.1.2.2 In 2010: roughly 40% comes from oil industry
    * 1.2 Funding history
    * 1.2.1 1990s - Western Fuels Association and others
    * 1.2.2 1994 - founded New Hope Environmental Services
    * 1.2.3 Funding sources, formerly visible, became hidden
    * 1.3 Other funding
    * 1.3.1 2006, $100,000 from Intermountain Rural Electric Association
    * 1.4 2007 Funding disclosure concerns as expert witness in auto industry trial
    * 1.4.1 Outcome: Michaels withdrew as expert witness; Christy hired instead
  * 2 Articles and resources
    * 2.1 References
    * 2.2 Related SourceWatch articles
    * 2.3 External resources
    * 2.4 External articles

## Funding

### Sources of funding

#### In 2011, Waxman call for inquiry

_See the "2011, Rep. Waxman calls for inquiry into Michaels - possibly
misleading testimony on industry ties, funding sources" section, in the
"Controversies and criticisms" part of mainPatrick J. Michaels page._

#### Statements by Michaels on funding sources

##### In 2002: "the vast majority [of my funding] comes from taxpayer-

supported entities"

Asked about his funding on _CNN_ in August 2002 Michaels rejected the
suggestion that industry funding influenced his work. "Well, you know, most of
my funding, the vast majority, comes from taxpayer-supported entities. I would
make the argument that if funding colors research, I should be certainly
biased more towards the taxpayers, of which I am one, than towards industry.
But the fact of the matter is, numbers are objective," he said.[1]

##### In 2010: roughly 40% comes from oil industry

Pat Michaels admits: '40 percent' of funding comes from big oil

In an August 2010 interview with CNN, Michaels estimated that about 40% of his
funding came from the oil industry.[2]

### Funding history

#### 1990s - Western Fuels Association and others

Michaels' prominence also led to new funding from fossil fuel interests. In
1991-92 an anonymous donor made of grant of $50,000 to Michaels for his work
on climate change, the Edison Electric Institute paid $25,000 between 1992 and
1995 for a literature review of climate change and updates. Western Fuels
Association contributed $63,000 for "research on global climate change" and
between 1994 $98,000 from Gesamtverband des Deutschen Stenkohlenbergbaus in
Germany.[3]

#### 1994 - founded New Hope Environmental Services

As Michaels' corporate funding was taking off, in 1994 he founded and is the
sole owner of New Hope Environmental Services, which refers to itself as "an
advocacy science consulting firm". Aside from publishing the World Climate
Report, the firm boasts that its staff often provide testimony to Congress and
commentary on climate issues to media outlets.[4].

Writing in Harpers Magazine in 1995, author Ross Gelbspan noted that "Michaels
has received more than $115,000 over the last four years from coal and energy
interests. _World Climate Review_ , a quarterly he founded that routinely
debunks climate concerns, was funded by Western Fuels."[5]

#### Funding sources, formerly visible, became hidden

One substantial benefit in having created New Hope Environmental Services was
that corporate funders could route financial support for Michaels work via the
firm which was under no obligation to disclose who its clients were. After its
was created, further corporate funding was noticeably absent from Michaels
university curriculum vitae.[3]

### Other funding

Michaels continued to attract public funding for projects, such as $195,000
from the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality for "research on science
and policy on global warming." He also gained $98,000 from the Cato Institute
to underwrite the the production of _The Satanic Gases: Clearing the Air about
Global Warming_ , a book he co-authored with Robert C. Balling, Jr.[3]

#### 2006, $100,000 from Intermountain Rural Electric Association

A furor was raised when it was revealed in 2006 that, at customer expense,
Patrick Michaels was quietly paid $100,000 by an electric utility,
Intermountain Rural Electric Association (IREA), which burns coal to help
confuse the issue of global warming. In a nine-page memo, the general manager
of the Colorado-based IREA co-operative, Stanley Lewandowski Jr., railed
against the the scientific consensus supporting the need to curb greenhouse
gases. The memo, which was circulated in mid-July 2006 to more than 900
members of the National Rural Electric Cooperative Association, was leaked to
_ABC News_. "We decided to support Dr. Patrick Michaels and his group (New
Hope Environmental Services, Inc.) ... In February of this year, IREA alone
contributed $100,000 to Dr. Michaels." Lewandowski also wrote that IREA had
rattled the tin for Michaels amongst other groups and "have obtained
additional contributions and pledges for Dr. Michaels group." (The memo also
reports on others campaigning against taking action to limit climate change:
"The Competitive Enterprise Institute (CEI) has been running two ads in ten
states that were financed by General Motors and the Ford Motor Company." [6]
[7] )

### 2007 Funding disclosure concerns as expert witness in auto industry trial

In 2007 Michaels was retained by Green Mountain Chrysler Plymouth Dodge Jeep,
Green Mountain Ford Mercury, Joe Tornabene's GMC, the Alliance of Automobile
Manufacturers, the DaimlerChyrsler Corporation and General Motors Corporation
as an "expert witness" in a case where the auto manufacturers and dealers were
suing George Crombie, the Secretary of the Vermont Agency of Natural Resources
and others in a bid to prevent the state regulating greenhouse gases. In the
process of the discovery of documents and during his deposition Michaels
provided details of "New Hope's funding sources and the amount of their
funding." However, this information was not publicly available but treated as
confidential information. However, in late 2006 Greenpeace filed a motion
seeking access to details of the funders of Michaels firm.[8]

In an affidavit Michaels stated that "as the case moved closer to trial, I
learned in conversations with plaintiff's counsel that New Hope's confidential
information might not remain confidential if I testified at trial.
Consequently, on or around April 7, 2007, I informed plaintiffs counsel that I
would not testify at trial. My sole reason in doing so was concern that my
trial testimony would result in the loss of confidentiality for the New Hope
information."[8]

Michaels affidavit stated that "large companies are understandably adverse to
negative publicity. Thus, the global warming controversy has created an
environment in which companies who wish to support New Hope's research and
advocacy about global warming science are increasingly willing to do so only
if their support remains confidential."[8]

Michaels complained that "public disclosure of a company's funding of New Hope
and its employees has already caused considerable financial loss to New Hope.
For example, in 2006 Tri-State Generation & Transmission Association, Inc., an
electric utility, had requested that its support of $50,000 to New Hope be
held confidential. After this support was inadvertently made public by another
New Hope client, Tri-State informed me that it would no longer support New
Hope because of adverse publicity. Also, in 2006, when a $100,000 contract
between New Hope and electric utility Intermountain Rural Electric Association
to synthesize and research new findings on global warming became public
knowledge, a public campaign was initiated to change the composition of the
board of directors so that there would be no additional funding. That campaign
was successful, as Intermountain has not provided further funding."[8]

Michaels argued that the Greenpeace motion seeking disclosure should be
rejected as it would "result in New Hope losing clients. I am doubtful that
New Hope will continue to stay in business as an effective consultancy ...
This is precisely why I did not testify at trial. Although this resulted in a
short-term loss of income to me, it assured the long-term viability of New
Hope. Besides modest speaking fees, New Hope is my sole source of income
beyond a negotiated retirement package from the University of Virginia. Thus,
the Greenpeace motion, if granted, would imnperil my livelihood. Hew Hope also
employs the services of other scientists who receive all or a substantial part
of their incomes from New Hope. Their livelihoods are also threatened by the
Greenpeace motion."[8] (On its website, New Hope Environmental Services does
not list its staff. However, the _World Climate Report_ blog lists its staff,
as of May 2009 on a webpage dated March 2005, [9] as comprising Michaels,
Robert C. Balling, Jr., Robert E. Davis and Paul C. Knappenberger.)

#### Outcome: Michaels withdrew as expert witness; Christy hired instead

In Michaels' place, the auto industry groups hired John R. Christy as their
expert witness.[10]

## Articles and resources

### References

  1. ↑ Kate O'Beirne, Interview with Patrick Michaels, "Capital Gang", CNN, August 19, 2002.
  2. ↑ Brad Johnson, Cato’s Pat Michaels admits 40 percent of funding comes from big oil, August 16, 2010.
  3. ↑ 3.0 3.1 3.2 "Patrick Michaels CV Plain Text File-Climate Change Guide/Skeptics and Contrarians", Society of Environmental Journalists, accessed May 2009.
  4. ↑ "New Hope Environmental Services", New Hope Environmental Services website, accessed May 2009.
  5. ↑ Ross Gelbspan, "The heat is on: The warming of the world's climate sparks a blaze of denial", _Harpers Magazine_ , December 1995.
  6. ↑ Clayton Sandell and Bill Blakemore, "ABC News Reporting Cited As Evidence In Congressional Hearing On Global Warming", _ABC News_ August 3, 2006.
  7. ↑ Stanley R. Lewandowksi, "Memo", Intermountain Rural Electric Association, July 17, 2006.
  8. ↑ 8.0 8.1 8.2 8.3 8.4 Dr. Patrick J. Michaels, "Affidavit of Dr. Patrick J. Michaels", United States District Court for the District of Vermont, Green Mountain Chrysler et al. v. Crombie et al., Docket No. 02:05-CV-302, July 6, 2007.(Pdf)
  9. ↑ "Staff", _World Climate Report_ (blog), March 15, 2005.
  10. ↑ Green Mountain Chrysler Plymouth Dodge Jeep et al vs George Crombie, Case No. 2:05-cv-302, September 12, 2007, page 44.

### Related SourceWatch articles

  * Patrick J. Michaels

### External resources

### External articles

Retrieved from "https://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=Patrick_J.
_Michaels_ \- _funding&oldid=719197"

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Page
  * Discussion

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * View source
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * What Is CMD?
  * Donate Here
  * ALEC Exposed
  * Outsourcing America Exposed
  * Koch Exposed
  * FrackSwarm
  * CoalSwarm
  * NFIB Exposed
  * Fix the Debt
  * State Policy Network
  * Recent Changes
  * Random page

### How To

  * Sign Up to Edit
  * Contact Us
  * Help Write History
  * Research Corporations
  * Edit an Article
  * Correct Errors
  * Search Effectively
  * Find FAQs
  * Explore Our Index
  * Blow the Whistle
  * Find the Home Page

### Other Info

  * About SourceWatch
  * About PRWatch
  * Search Categories
  * Random Article

### Other Policies

  * Ground Rules
  * Disclaimers
  * Copyright Info

### Ads

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Special pages
  * Printable version
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Cite this page

  * This page was last edited on 28 September 2017, at 00:30.

  * Content is available under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike. 

SourceWatch is a project of the Center for Media and Democracy (CMD).  
CMD is a 501(c)(3) tax-exempt non-profit.

  * Privacy policy
  * About SourceWatch
  * Disclaimers
  * Press Inquiries
  * Mobile view

  * ![Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike](/resources/assets/licenses/cc-by-nc-sa.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/resources/assets/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

