

# World Climate Report

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![Question book-

new.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/99/Question_book-

new.svg/50px-Question_book-new.svg.png)

|

This article **relies too much onreferences to primary sources**. Please
improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. _( January 2009)_
_(Learn how and when to remove this template message)_

\---|---

**World Climate Report** , a newsletter edited by Patrick Michaels, was
produced by the Greening Earth Society, a non-profit organization created by
the Western Fuels Association.

Early editions were paper based; it was then transferred to a web-only format,
having ceased publication as a physically based report with Volume 8 in 2002.
It continues to exist in blog form at www.worldclimatereport.com, although the
website itself has not been updated since late 2012.

World Climate Report presents a skeptical view of anthropogenic-driven mass
global climate change, or as it describes, 'Global Warming Alarmism'. However,
it does not reject the concepts of global climate change or greenhouse theory
(or other well-established and widely accepted scientific theories or
empirical studies),[1][2] in general attempting to engender itself as giving a
well balanced and scientific view of the sources (though often at a contrary
expense of its perceived adversaries: the aforementioned alleged 'Global
Warming Alarmists').[3]

WCR says of itself:

    
    
    _World Climate Report, a concise, hard-hitting and scientifically correct response to the global change reports which gain attention in the literature and popular press. As the nation's leading publication in this realm, World Climate Report is exhaustively researched, impeccably referenced, and always timely. This popular biweekly newsletter points out the weaknesses and outright fallacies in the science that is being touted as "proof" of disastrous warming. It's the perfect antidote against those who argue for proposed changes to theRio Climate Treaty, such as the Kyoto Protocol, which are aimed at limiting carbon emissions from the United States ... World Climate Report has become the definitive and unimpeachable source for what _ nature _now calls the “mainstream skeptic” point of view._ [1].
    

In addition to Patrick Michaels (chief editor), the staff is listed as Robert
C. Balling, Jr (contributing editor), Robert Davis (contributing editor), and
Paul Knappenberger (Administrator).

New Hope Environmental Services, an advocacy science consulting firm, claims
WCR as its biweekly newsletter.

## References[edit]

  1. **^** World Climate Report (April 13, 2007). "Methane Matters". _World Climate Report_. Retrieved 2007-05-03. "There is no doubt that fossil fuel burning around the world is causing an increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO  
2) concentration, and CO  
2 remains the number one anthropo-generated greenhouse gas." [and] "[M]ethane
is far more powerful as a greenhouse gas than CO  
2 – the same mass of methane would warm the earth 23 times more than the same
mass of CO  
2."

  2. **^** World Climate Report (May 10, 2005). "Global Warming: Something New Under the Sun?". _World Climate Report_. Retrieved 2007-05-09. "Before you kill the greenhouse effect, please note that we think this is a lot of hooey. But if you accept these results, that’s where you have to go." [and] "That’s our take, because it’s the only one that seems internally consistent. But, if somehow we are wrong (a rare event), then greenhouse warming is over, as the sensitivity of the earth’s temperature to carbon dioxide has been grossly overestimated. Believe us, we’d like to hope the latter is correct, but we have to call things in the most logical fashion."

  3. **^** Michaels, Patrick (February 6, 2007). "New Climate for Global Energy Policy". _Cato Institute Opinion & Commentary_. Retrieved 2007-05-03. "In summary, what's not new in today's IPCC report – that humans are warming the planet – will be treated as big news, while what is new – that sea levels are not likely to rise as much as previously predicted – will be ignored, at least by everyone except the extremist fringe."

  4. WCR cited by the Space Science and Engineering Center of the University of Wisconsin-Madison: _In the News: a monthly newsletter_ , "Data and Imagery," April 2007.

  5. Frontiers of Freedom's Center for Science and Public Policy produced a document entitled "Recent Research in Climate Change Issues" in 2005, compiled from numerous WCR articles.

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_Climate_Report&oldid=884211652"

Categories:

  * Climate change skepticism and denial
  * Environmental reports

Hidden categories:

  * Articles lacking reliable references from January 2009
  * All articles lacking reliable references

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

Add links

  * This page was last edited on 20 February 2019, at 06:10 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

