

![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/logo.png)

![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/themes/sotp-

foundation/images/logo-ei.png)![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/themes/sotp-

foundation/images/separator.png)![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/themes/sotp-foundation/images/logo-cu.png)

#### News from the Earth Institute

  * # 

  * Menu

  * Agriculture

  * Climate
  * Earth Sciences
  * Ecology
  * Energy
  * Health
  * Sustainability
  * Urbanization
  * Water

Climate

## What Are Climate Models and How Accurate Are They?

by Guest Blogger|May 18, 2018

![](/wp-content/themes/sotp-foundation/images/icon-comments.png) Comments

**By Lauren Harper**

![temperatures based on climate model](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/temperature-model.gif)

Temperature projections based on a climate model. Source: NOAA

There’s a famous saying that “The climate is what you expect; the weather is
what you get.” As a native Texan moving to New York, I had an idea of what to
expect, but was not fully prepared for what I would get. Because New York’s
climate is drastically different from what I’m used to, every morning before I
leave my apartment I religiously check the weather forecast. Very quickly I
know if it’s going to rain, whether there’s a storm brewing off the coast, or
if I will need extra layers.

Whereas weather can change dramatically from day to day, the climate means the
average conditions over roughly 30 years—how warm is the region, on average,
and how much precipitation does it get in a year? Texas’s climate, for
example, tends to be warmer for the majority of the year, whereas New York is
on average cooler with clearly defined seasons.

Weather and climate are sometimes used interchangeably, but scientists,
meteorologists and researchers study and model them differently.

**What is a Weather Model?**

“Today’s weather forecast is partly cloudy with a chance of showers in the
late afternoon…” This is a familiar weather summary that you have probably
heard before from a meteorologist. To make these predictions, meteorologists
use weather data and forecast models to determine current and future
atmospheric conditions.

![Weather Balloon, Weather Modeling, NASA](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/553790main_ED11-0150-037_full_full-303x220.jpg)

NASA Dryden meteorologists prepare to launch a weather balloon next to a Sonic
Detection And Ranging wind profiling unit. Photo: NASA Dryden / Tom Tshida

Because weather takes place hour by hour, forecast models use current
atmospheric and oceanic conditions to predict future weather. The forecast
takes into account humidity, temperature, air pressure, wind speed and
direction, as well as cloud cover. Geographic location, proximity to water,
urban structures, latitude and elevation can also influence the weather you
experience.

Weather models work at resolutions high enough to generate different
predictions for neighboring towns, in some cases, but only over short
timescales of about two weeks maximum.

**What is a Climate Model?**

Essentially, climate models are an extension of weather forecasting. But
whereas weather models make predictions over specific areas and short
timespans, climate models are broader and analyze long timespans. They predict
how average conditions will change in a region over the coming decades.

![Climate Modeling, 3-D Grid](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/11-263x303.png)

Illustration of the three-dimensional grid of a climate model. Image: Ruddiman

Climate models include more atmospheric, oceanic and land processes than
weather models do—such as ocean circulation and melting glaciers. These models
are typically generated from mathematical equations that use thousands of data
points to simulate the transfer of energy and water that takes place in
climate systems.

Scientists use climate models to understand complex earth systems. These
models allow them to test hypotheses and draw conclusions on past and future
climate systems. This can help them determine whether abnormal weather events
or storms are a result of changes in climate or just part of the routine
climate variation. For example, when predicting tropical cyclones during
hurricane season, scientists can use climate models to predict the number of
tropical storms that may form off the coast and in what regions they are
likely to make landfall.

When creating climate models, scientists use one of three common types of
simple climate models: energy balance models, intermediate complexity models,
and general circulation models. These models use numbers to simplify the
complexities that exist when taking into account all the factors that affect
climate, like atmospheric mixing and ocean current.

Energy balance models help to forecast climate changes as a result of Earth’s
energy budget. This model takes into account surface temperatures from solar
energy, albedo or reflectivity, and the natural cooling from the earth
emitting heat back out into space. To predict climate, scientists use an
equation that represents the amount of energy coming in versus going out, to
understand the changes in heat storage—for example, as more heat-absorbing CO2
fills up the atmosphere. Scientists then take this equation and plug it into
box models that represent a square of land within a three-dimensional grid, to
express climate in a region or even across a continent.

_This video explaining climate modeling was created by the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) in collaboration with
Australian Bureau of Meteorology._

Intermediate complexity models are similar to energy balance models but they
include and combine several of Earth’s geographical structures—land, oceans,
and ice features, for instance. These geographical features allow intermediate
complexity models to simulate large-scale climate scenarios such as glacial
fluctuations, ocean current shifts, and atmospheric composition changes over
long timescales. Intermediate complexity models describe the climate with less
spatial and time-specific detail, so they are best used for large-scale and
low-frequency variations in the earth’s climate system.

![Ice, Ice Core, Modeling, Research, Carbon

Dating](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/2616_p1000526-1280px-90-303x233.jpg)

An ice core. Credit: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center/Ludovic Brucker

General circulation models are the most complex and precise models for
understanding climate systems and predicting climate change. These models
include information regarding the atmospheric chemistry, land type, carbon
cycle, ocean circulation and glacial makeup of the isolated area. This type of
model also uses a three-dimensional grid, with each box representing around
100 square kilometers of land, air, or sea, which is better resolution than
the typical 200 to 600 kilometers per box. This model is more sophisticated
than the energy balance and intermediate complexity models, but it does
require a larger amount of computing time—each simulation could take several
weeks to run.

**What Can Climate Models Tell Us About the Future and Past?**

For many decades, scientists have been collecting data on climate using cores
from ice, trees, and coral, as well as carbon dating. From this research they
have discovered details about past human activity, temperature changes in our
oceans, periods of extreme drought, and much more.

As more data points are collected, they increase the accuracy of existing
climate models. This enhances climate forecasting, because past climate data
helps to establish a baseline for typical climate systems. From there,
researchers establish climate variables that they want to keep the same, like
cloud cover, and variables they want to test, like increased carbon dioxide,
to evaluate hypotheses about future changes. These could estimate anything
from sea level rise to increased temperatures and risk of drought and forest
fires.

**How Accurate are Climate Models?**

Since the world can’t afford to wait decades to measure the accuracy of
climate model predictions, scientists test a model’s accuracy using past
events. If the model accurately predicts past events that we know happened,
then it should be pretty good at predicting the future, too. And the more we
learn about past and present conditions, the more accurate these models
become.

Climate models are complex because of the all the elements that are in flux
within Earth’s systems. If our atmosphere was like the moon’s, climate
modeling would be fairly easy because the moon barely has an atmosphere. On
Earth, climate scientists must account for temperature fluctuations, wind
patterns, ocean currents, land surface characteristics and much more. Because
of this, the models always consider some level of uncertainty – but models
measuring smaller areas with higher resolutions produce more accurate models.
Despite a small amount of uncertainty, scientists find climate models of the
21st century to be pretty accurate because they are based on well-founded
physical principles of earth system processes. This basis solidifies the
confidence of the scientific community that human emissions are changing the
climate, which will impact the entire planet.

**Why Are Climate Models Important?**

Understanding past, present and future climate helps us to understand how
Earth’s systems naturally function. This information, combined with climate
models, allows us to determine how both natural and manmade influences have
and will impact changes in our climate. These predictions and results can also
suggest how to mitigate the worst effects of climate change, and they help
decision-makers to prioritize environmental issues based on scientific
evidence.

![Climate Change Vulnerability ](http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/Climate-Model-2-303x182.jpg)

Climate change vulnerability. Credit: Wesleyan University and Columbia
University

Numerous models have shown that the climate is changing. Increased greenhouse
gas emissions from human activities are resulting in positive feedbacks in our
climate systems. These positive feedbacks can result in not so positive
changes in earth systems, like melting glacial ice, rising ocean temperatures,
increasing odds of severe flooding and drought, and climbing surface
temperatures.

_A climate model predicts future temperatures. This model was developed by
several climate modeling research groups, including NASA 's Goddard Institute
for Space Studies._

It is crucial that we continue to collect data and improve models, increasing
their accuracy to refining our knowledge of climate and weather. It is also
imperative that we recognize the importance of data-driven results and
science-backed facts as they influence how communities and policy-makers plan
for the future. Climate and weather models both have the ability to advance
the way we plan our cities, influence business opportunities, and even how we
plan out our day. These models are our best chance at finding ways to mitigate
the dangerous effects of climate change.

_**Lauren Harper** is an intern in the Earth Institute communications
department. She is a graduate student in the Environmental Science and Policy
Program at Columbia’s School of International and Public Affairs._

### Get our newsletter

I'd like to get more stories like this.

Email address

Secure and Spam free...

* * *

#### Tags:

ClimateClimate ModelingWeather

### Related Posts

![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/Winckler_CoreSites-200x150.jpg)Drilling the Seabed
Below Earth's Most Powerful Ocean Current
![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/DSC_0034-200x150.jpg)Scientists See Fingerprint of
Warming Climate on Droughts Going Back to 1900

### Leave a Reply

![avatar](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=40&d=mm&r=g)

I agree to help cultivate an open and respectful discussion. I understand rude
and/or profane comments will be automatically deleted.

__

__

__

__This comment form is under antispam protection

* * *

![avatar](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/?s=48&d=mm&r=g)

I agree to help cultivate an open and respectful discussion. I understand rude
and/or profane comments will be automatically deleted.

__

__

__

__This comment form is under antispam protection

* * *

**Subscribe**

Notify of

new follow-up comments new replies to my comments

  * Search for:

  * ![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/themes/sotp-foundation/images/button-newsletter.png)

  * ## Featured Story

![](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/action-cement-

construction-2219024-200x150.jpg)

#### Floods, Infrastructure and Climate Change

  * ![Earth Institute Fieldwork Map](https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/wp-content/themes/sotp-foundation/images/button-map.png)
  * Tweets by earthinstitute
  * ## Upcoming Events

BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2019 New York Scientific Data Summit
2019

* * *

  * ## Topics

Topics Select Category Agriculture Climate Earth Sciences Ecology Education
Energy Gender Equality General Earth Institute Health Natural Disasters
Poverty / Development Press Release Sustainability Urbanization Water

  * ## Research Centers & Programs

Climate MattersLamont-Doherty Earth ObservatoryMasters in Development
PracticeWater Matters

  * ## Authors

Advanced Consortium on Cooperation, Conflict, and ComplexityAdam FischerAdrian
SoghoianAlyssa RomeAvantika GoswamiAlice GraffAlex HallidayAdrienne
KenyonAllison LadueAlejandra BorundaAlex FischerAllison GreenbergAnna
MazhirovAmy McDermottRoger AndersonAndrea BascheAngelie SinghArif NooriAshley
CurtisHuili ZhuAdam SobelAnnie TickellAdam YukelsonRobert S. ChenBenjamin
PrestonBrian KahnBob AndersonCassie XuCathy VaughanColumbia Center on
Sustainable InvestmentCatherine FullertonCenter for International Earth
Science Information NetworkColumbia Water CenterCenter for Research on
Environmental DecisionsCari ShimkusCourtney SmallCourtney St. JohnDebbie
CookDebra TillingerDavid FunkhouserDavida HellerDiana B SierraDavid
MaurrasseDonna ShillingtonDiego VillarrealDwi SusantoEarth InstituteEve
WarburtonEinat LevCenter on Global Energy PolicyEric HolthausElizabeth
RobinsonEmily RothenbergEve SolomonElisabeth SydorFarah HegaziKyle
FrischkornFrancesco FiondellaFrank NitscheGina AckermanGavin SchmidtElisabeth
GawthropGeoffrey HealGilma MantillaGisela WincklerGrant GoodrichHamsa
SubramaniamHannah ChangHima BataviaHayley MartinezIndrani DasInternational
Research Institute for Climate and SocietyIvy MorganJaclyn Leigh CarlsenJames
WarieroJessica CrespoJeffrey SachsJennifer VettelJesper FrantJessica
FanzoJeremy HinsdaleJill A. VanTongerenJim CochranJim GahertyJonathan
NicholsJohn McArthurJohn MutterJu Young LeeJulia Apland HitzJulie
ArrighiKatherine AllenKalpana VenkatasubramanianKate BrashKate MorrisKate
WeinbergerKatherine ReganKatie HornerKatie JohnsonKavita Jain-CocksKelsie
DeFranciaKelsey DyezKevin KrajickKate Kennedy FreemanKim Anne KastensKim
MartineauKlaus LacknerKristin FrancozKatherine SchulmanKirsty TintoKyu
LeeKathy ZhangLakis PolycarpouLareef ZubairLaura LyLauren BarredoLauren
ZieglerLenfest CenterLonnie ThompsonLaura PirainoLindsay SiegelLucia
RodriguezMadeleine RubensteinMargie TurrinMariapaola SuttoMarie DeNoia
AronsohnMary-Elena CarrMattias ChesleyMeaghan DalyMelika EdquistMeg ReitzMegan
WinstonMeghna BhattacharjeeMichael B. GerrardMichael BarnettMichelle
CordrayMichelle ShevinMike StecklerMolly HellmuthMilap PatelMarivi Perdomo
CabaMeg TowleMargo WeissNatalie Unwin-KuruneriNikhil NarulaNatalia MrozNeil
PedersonNathan RudderPaola MejiaPatrick KinneyPaul BlockPeter ColemanPeter
KelemenPeter SchlosserPatty MechaelPratigya PolissarPoonam AroraPhebe
PiersonPrabhjot DhadiallaPrabhjot SinghPamela VreelandRenee ChoRebecca
FowlerRonny FriedrichRebecca GreenwaldRichard GonzalezRichard PlunzBob
CroccoRobert HsuRustom MasalawalaSabin Center for Climate Change LawSamantha
TressSarah BrennanSarah Wakefield AdhyaSuzanne CarbotteThomas ChenScott
BarrettSelim TliliSarah FechtShahid NaeemShahzeen Z. AttariSidney
HemmingSharon KimStacy MorfordSamantha OstrowskiShama PerveenBeth
StaufferStephanie RuizStephen HammerStephen YangSteve CohenSarah TweedieSusan
BlausteinSusan KarutiTanya HeikkilaTheresa E. HernandezTim CreytsTim
CroneTimothy GildnerTobias SiegfriedTamara PlummerTristan JonesTracy
SlagleTrevor WilliamsUyen Kim HuynhUjala QadirUpmanu LallWilliam MenkeYanis
Ben AmorYochanan KushnirYombo Tankoano

  * ## Archives

Select Year 2019 (206) 2018 (434) 2017 (370) 2016 (396) 2015 (415) 2014 (383)
2013 (334) 2012 (508) 2011 (511) 2010 (549) 2009 (285) 2008 (11)

  * _**State of the Planet** is a forum for discussion on varying viewpoints. The opinions expressed by the authors and those providing comments are theirs alone, and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the Earth Institute or Columbia University._

Earth Institute, Columbia University  
Ask a Question / Suggest a Story

wpDiscuz

### Get our newsletter

Sign me up for the Earth Institute newsletter, so I can receive more stories
like this.

Email address

This website uses cookies as well as similar tools and technologies to
understand visitors' experiences. By continuing to use this website, you
consent to Columbia University's usage of cookies and similar technologies, in
accordance with the Columbia University Website Cookie Notice.Close

