

Go to Content Go to Navigation Go to Navigation Go to Site Search Homepage

Planned Parenthood has a partner website about sexual health topics
specifically for Nigeria. Would you like to go to the Nigeria website?

Visit the Nigeria Site (DASUBJECTMATTER.ORG) STAY ON THE PLANNED PARENTHOOD
SITE

  * Español

![Planned Parenthood](/static/assets/img/planned-parenthood-horizontal.svg)

  * Learn

#### Sexual and Reproductive Health

    
    
    * Abortion
    * Birth Control
    * Cancer
    * Emergency Contraception
    * Health and Wellness
    * Pregnancy
    * Sex and Relationships
    * Sexual Orientation and Gender
    * Sexually Transmitted Infections (STDs)
    * Glossary A - Z
    * For Teens
    * For Parents
    * For Educators
    

#### Related Health Topics

    
    
    * Depression
    * Vaccinations
    * Hypertension
    * Diabetes
    * Substance Use Disorder
    * Anxiety
    

  * Get Care

#### Get Care

    
    
    * Schedule an Appointment
    * Our Services
    * Health Insurance
    * Get Care Online
    * Spot On
    * Blog
    

  * Get Involved

#### Get Involved

    
    
    * Donate
    * Ways to Give
    * Jobs and Volunteering
    * Take Action
    * Shop
    

  * Donate 
  * Open Search Search

Search

Find

Español Open Search Search

Search

Find

  * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Learn

#### Sexual and Reproductive Health

    
    
    * Overview
    * Abortion
    * Birth Control
    * Cancer
    * Emergency Contraception
    * Health and Wellness
    * Pregnancy
    * Sex and Relationships
    * Sexual Orientation and Gender
    * Sexually Transmitted Infections (STDs)
    * Glossary A - Z
    * For Teens
    * For Parents
    * For Educators
    

#### Related Health Topics

    
    
    * Depression
    * Vaccinations
    * Hypertension
    * Diabetes
    * Substance Use Disorder
    * Anxiety
    

  * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Get Care

#### Get Care

    
    
    * Overview
    * Schedule an Appointment
    * Our Services
    * Health Insurance
    * Get Care Online
    * Spot On
    * Blog
    

  * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Get Involved

#### Get Involved

    
    
    * Overview
    * Donate
    * Ways to Give
    * Jobs and Volunteering
    * Take Action
    * Shop
    

  * 20170629_mobile_icons_d05 Donate 

  * Home

  * Learn
  * Abortion
  * Considering Abortion
  * Current: What facts do I need to know about abortion? 

# What facts about abortion do I need to know?

In This Section

  * Considering Abortion 

  * What facts do I need to know about abortion? 

Abortion is a very safe procedure. Here are the facts about your options, the
different kinds of abortion, and what to expect.

## What are the different kinds of abortion?

**Medication abortion** , also known as the “abortion pill,” is when you take
medicines that you get from a trained doctor or nurse to end an early
pregnancy. **In-clinic abortion** is done in a health center by a trained
doctor or nurse. Both kinds of abortion are safe and effective.

First trimester abortion facts:

###### Common Question

|

###### **In-Clinic Abortion**

|

###### **Medication Abortion**

---|---|--- 

###### **How does it work?**

|

A doctor or nurse uses medical instruments and gentle suction to remove the
pregnancy from your uterus.

|

You take pills that end your pregnancy and make your uterus expel the
pregnancy tissue (like an early miscarriage).

###### **How well does it work?**

|

It works more than 99% of the time.

|

8 weeks of pregnancy or less: it works about 94-98% of the time.

8-9 weeks: it works about 94-96% of the time.

9-10 weeks: it works about 91-93% of the time.

###### **How long does the abortion take?**

|

The procedure usually takes about 10 minutes, but the full visit usually takes
a few hours. In some cases, state law requires you to come to the health
center for a separate visit before the abortion. Abortions later in pregnancy
may take longer and require more visits to the health center.

|

Your appointment at the health center will take a few hours, and then they’ll
give you the pills. You take 2 different medicines, up to 2 days apart. You
may take both of the medicines at home. Or you may take one or both of them at
the health center. Most of the time the abortion is over within 24 hours after
you take the second set of pills. You’ll have a follow up visit or phone call
to make sure the pills worked. In some cases, state law requires you to come
to the health center for a separate visit before the abortion.

If you need an abortion and have passed your first trimester, you can learn
about your in-clinic abortion options.

## Is abortion safe?

Both in-clinic and medication abortions are very safe. In fact, abortion is
one of the safest medical procedures out there. Overall, 1 in 4 women in the
U.S. will have an abortion by the time they’re 45 years old.

Planned Parenthood leads the country with the most up-to-date medical
standards and guidelines for health care, including abortion. We regularly
review new medical research and get updates from groups like the U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health Organization, and the
American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Serious problems after an abortion are very rare. But like any medicine or
medical procedure, there are some risks. Learn more about the risks of in-
clinic abortion and the risks of the abortion pill.

## How will I feel after having an abortion?

You will get written after-care instructions and a phone number you can call
if you have any questions or concerns. You may have to come back for a check
up or lab work after your procedure.

Plan on resting after your abortion. You can usually go back to work, school
and most other normal activities the next day. Avoid hard work or heavy
exercise for a few days. You can use pads, tampons, or a menstrual cup for any
bleeding — whatever's the most comfortable for you. But your nurse or doctor
may recommend you use pads so you can track how much you're bleeding. You can
have sex as soon as you feel ready.

Most people feel fine within a day or two, but it’s common for bleeding to
last for a week (or several weeks after the abortion pill). Cramping can
happen for a few days.

It’s totally normal to have a lot of different emotions after your abortion.
Everyone’s experience is different, and there’s no “right” or “wrong” way to
feel. Most people are relieved and don’t regret their decision. Others may
feel sadness, guilt, or regret after an abortion. Lots of people have all
these feelings at different times. These feelings aren’t unique to having an
abortion. People feel many different emotions after giving birth, too.

Serious, long-term emotional problems after an abortion are rare. But
everybody’s different, and certain things can make coping with an abortion
hard. Most people feel better if they have someone supportive to talk to after
an abortion. But even if you don’t think there’s anybody in your life you can
talk with, you’re not alone. Your nurse or doctor can talk with you, or help
you find a licensed counselor or a non-judgmental support group. You can also
call Exhale or All-Options, free after-abortion talklines. They will give you
confidential and non-judgmental emotional support after your abortion — no
matter how you’re feeling.

## Will an abortion affect my health?

Abortion is safe. Unless there’s a rare and serious complication that’s not
treated, there’s no risk to your ability to have children in the future or to
your overall health. Having an abortion doesn’t increase your risk for breast
cancer, and it doesn’t cause depression or mental health issues. Abortions
don’t cause infertility either. In fact, it’s possible to get pregnant quickly
after you have an abortion. So it’s a good idea to talk to your nurse or
doctor about a birth control plan for after your abortion.

There are many myths out there about abortion. The nurses and doctors at
Planned Parenthood can give you accurate information about any concerns you
have.

Previous Overview

Was this page helpful?

  * Yes 
  * No 

Help us improve - how could this information be more helpful?

How did this information help you?

Please answer below.

Are you human? (Sorry, we have to ask!)

Please don't check this box if you are a human.

Send Now No Thanks

You’re the best! Thanks for your feedback.

Thanks for your feedback.

### Book an Appointment

Zip, City, or State

We couldn't access your location, please search for a location.

Search

Please fill out this field. Sorry, we could not find any Health Center for
your search.

Or call 1-800-230-7526

### Need Help? Chat Now.

Chat online to get answers about pregnancy, birth control, emergency
contraception, STDs, and abortion.

Chat Now

## Book an Appointment

Zip, City, or State

We couldn't access your location, please search for a location.

Search

Please fill out this field. Sorry, we could not find any Health Center for
your search.

Or call 1-800-230-7526

![Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc.](/static/assets/img/planned-

parenthood-stacked-tag.6916ef62aa8e.svg)

Planned Parenthood delivers vital reproductive health care, sex education, and
information to millions of people worldwide. Planned Parenthood Federation of
America, Inc. is a registered 501(c)(3) nonprofit under EIN 13-1644147.
Donations are tax-deductible to the fullest extent allowable under the law.

Call Planned Parenthood Donate

Follow us on Follow us on Follow us on Follow us on Follow us on

  * About Us Toggle Navigation
    * Who We Are
    * Leadership
    * Annual Reports
    * Local Offices
    * Planned Parenthood Global
  * Get Involved Toggle Navigation
    * Take Action
    * Share Your Story
    * Volunteer
    * Shop
  * Resources Toggle Navigation
    * Jobs
    * Facts & Figures
    * Newsroom
    * Press Releases
    * Online Quizzes
  * About This Site Toggle Navigation

    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Sitemap
    * Contact Us
  * Privacy Policy

  * Terms of Use
  * Contact Us

(C) 2019 Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

