

menu

  * Get Started
    * Learn
    * Climate Impacts
    * Land Types
    * Regions
      * West
      * Northeast
      * Southeast
      * Midwest
    * Plan
    * Adapt
    * Inspire
    * Take a Self Assessment
  * Build Resilience
    * What is Resilience?
    * Resilience Guide
    * Resilience Projects – Case Study Highlights
  * Natural Climate Solutions
    * Land Management
    * Forests
    * Wetlands
    * Agricultural Lands
    * Carbon Markets
    * Forest Carbon
    * Soil Carbon
    * Blue Carbon
  * Renewable Energy
    * Renewable Energy Siting
    * Renewable Energy Projects: Case Study Highlights
  * Communications
    * Communications Best Practices
    * Divestment and Socially Responsible Investment
    * Support Carbon Markets
  * Case Studies
    * Adaptation
    * Carbon Finance
    * Education and Outreach
    * Mitigation
  * About
    * Library
    * Browse Resources
    * Glossary Terms

![Conservation in a Changing Climate Logo](http://climatechange.lta.org/wp-

content/themes/climate-change-toolkit/images/logo.png)

  * Get Started
    * Learn
    * Climate Impacts
    * Land Types
    * Regions
      * West
      * Northeast
      * Southeast
      * Midwest
    * Plan
    * Adapt
    * Inspire
    * Take a Self Assessment
  * Build Resilience
    * What is Resilience?
    * Resilience Guide
    * Resilience Projects – Case Study Highlights
  * Natural Climate Solutions
    * Land Management
    * Forests
    * Wetlands
    * Agricultural Lands
    * Carbon Markets
    * Forest Carbon
    * Soil Carbon
    * Blue Carbon
  * Renewable Energy
    * Renewable Energy Siting
    * Renewable Energy Projects: Case Study Highlights
  * Communications
    * Communications Best Practices
    * Divestment and Socially Responsible Investment
    * Support Carbon Markets
  * Case Studies
    * Adaptation
    * Carbon Finance
    * Education and Outreach
    * Mitigation
  * About
    * Library
    * Browse Resources
    * Glossary Terms

# Carbon Dioxide, Methane, Nitrous Oxide, and the Greenhouse Effect

Home » Get Started » Learn » Carbon Dioxide, Methane, Nitrous Oxide, and the
Greenhouse Effect

The greenhouse effect is a natural process where atmospheric gases trap heat -
a phenomena that allows the Earth to retain enough solar heat to be livable.
Without the greenhouse effect, the Earth would not support most forms of life.

### How Does the Greenhouse Effect Work?

Although the process is complex, the greenhouse effect can be described fairly
simply:

Sunlight passes through the atmosphere. Clouds, ice caps and other light-
colored surfaces reflect some light back into space, but most of the incoming
energy reaches the planet’s surface. The Earth radiates heat back toward
space. Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere absorb that heat, bouncing some back
to the Earth’s surface and releasing some into the atmosphere.

![Greenhouse Effect - Source: Will Elder, National Park

Service](http://climatechange.lta.org/wp-

content/uploads/cct/2015/02/Greenhouse-effect-300x177.jpg)Greater
concentrations of greenhouse gases mean more solar radiation is trapped within
the Earth's atmosphere, making temperatures rise. Source: W. Elder, NPS.

### What are Greenhouse Gases?

Greenhouse gases include carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and other
gases that accumulate in the atmosphere and create the heat-reflective layer
that keeps the Earth at a livable temperature. These gases form the insulation
that keeps the planet warm enough to support life.

Some of the most common — and worrisome — greenhouse gases are:

  * Carbon dioxide, which is emitted whenever coal, oil, natural gas and other carbon-rich fossil fuels are burned. Although carbon dioxide is not the most powerful greenhouse gas, it is the largest contributor to climate change because it is so common. In order to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, we need to reduce the amount of fuel we use in our cars, homes, and lives.
  * Methane is caused by the decomposition of plant matter, and is released from landfills, swamps, rice paddies. Cattle also release methane. Although methane emissions are lower than carbon dioxide emissions, it is considered a major greenhouse gas because each methane molecule has 25 times the global warming potential of a carbon dioxide molecule.
  * Nitrous oxide is released from bacteria in soil. Modern agricultural practices — tilling and soil cultivation, livestock waste management, and the use of nitrogen-rich fertilizers — contribute significantly to nitrous oxide emissions. A single nitrous oxide molecule has 298 times the global warming potential of a carbon dioxide molecule.
  * Additional greenhouse gases include hydrofluorocarbons (1,430-14,800 time the global warming potential of carbon dioxide), sulfur hexafluoride (22,800 times the global warming potential of carbon dioxide), and water vapor.
  * Learn more about "climate forcing" greenhouse gases.

![GHGases](http://climatechange.lta.org/wp-

content/uploads/cct/2015/02/GHGases-300x210.jpg)Of the twenty greenhouse
gases, carbon dioxide accounts for by far the largest share of radiative
forcing since 1990, and its contribution continues to grow at a steady rate.
Source: US EPA.

### If the Greenhouse Effect is Natural, Then What’s the Problem with

Greenhouse Gases?

Modern climate change is caused by an excess of greenhouse gases. This, in
turn, over-insulates the planet. As a result, temperatures rise. Imagine
wearing a winter parka in the tropics. The effect is similar — too much
insulation causes the planet to overheat, which has already begun to change
the climate. Learn more about the impacts of climate change.

![Since the Industrial Era began, humans have had an increasing effect on

climate, particularly by adding billions of tons of heat-trapping greenhouse

gases to the atmosphere.](http://climatechange.lta.org/wp-

content/uploads/cct/2015/02/USGRCP_models-observed-human-natural-

large-300x217.jpg)Since the Industrial Era began, humans have had an
increasing effect on climate, particularly by adding billions of tons of heat-
trapping greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. Source: US EPA.

###### Case Study Categories

  * Adaptation
  * Carbon Finance
  * Education and Outreach
  * Mitigation

###### Browse By Land Type

  * Coastal Lands
  * Designated Areas
  * Forest Lands
  * Grasslands, Shrublands, Savannas, and Deserts
  * Water Resources
  * Working Lands
    * Working Lands - Agriculture
    * Working Lands - Aquaculture
    * Working Lands - Forests

###### Browse By Impact

  * Changing Ocean Systems
    * Acidification
    * Rising Sea Levels
    * Strengthening Storms
  * Changing Water Regimes
    * Altered Precipitation
    * Altered Water Levels
    * Greater Flood Risk
  * Impacts to Species and Habitats
    * Coral Bleaching and Reef Degradation
    * Habitat Shifts
    * Shifting Seasons
  * Changing Temperatures
    * Extreme Temperature Change: Air Temperatures
    * Extreme Temperature Change: Water Temperatures

###### Relevant Terms

adaptation adaptation planning adaptive management blue carbon carbon
sequestration climate change climate change impacts coastal lands
communications conservation designated areas easements ecosystem services
education flooding / inundation forests funding geo-spatial tools grasslands
green infrastructure habitat hurricanes inspire mitigation Natural climate
solutions precipitation prepare renewable energy resilience restoration sea
level rise smart growth snow stakeholder engagement strategic conservation
targeted management uncertainty urban visualization tools vulnerability
warming temperatures water resources wetlands working lands working waters

  * Land Trust Alliance
  * Press Room
  * Learning Center
  * Privacy Policy
  * Sitemap
  * Contact Us

info@lta.org 202.638.4725

Copyright (C) 2019, Land Trust Alliance. All rights reserved.

![Land Trust Alliance Logo](http://climatechange.lta.org/wp-

content/themes/climate-change-toolkit/images/lta_logo_white.png)

