

Skip to main content

  * About
  * Scientists
  * Projects
  * Events
  * News
  * Donate

![Home](https://carnegiescience.edu/sites/carnegiescience.edu/files/CS%20Logo%20-%20Horizontal%20-%20Color%20-%20Open%20Shell.png)
![](https://carnegiescience.edu/sites/all/themes/carnegie/images/small_logo.png)

## Secondary menu

  * Why Carnegie
  * Contact
  * HR
  * Search

Donate

## Main menu

  * About
  * Scientists
  * Projects
  * Events
  * News

Sunday, May 02, 2010

# CO2 Effects on Plants Increase Global Warming

Sunday, May 02, 2010

![](https://carnegiescience.edu/sites/carnegiescience.edu/files/styles/large/public/PRCaoCaldeiraPhysiolMED5-3-10.jpg?itok=DuXEjNIQ)

**Palo Alto, CA** -- Trees and other plants help keep the planet cool, but
rising levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere are turning down this global
air conditioner. According to a new study by researchers at the Carnegie
Institution for Science, in some regions more than a quarter of the warming
from increased carbon dioxide is due to its direct impact on vegetation. This
warming is in addition to carbon dioxide's better-known effect as a heat-
trapping greenhouse gas. For scientists trying to predict global climate
change in the coming century, the study underscores the importance of
including plants in their climate models.

"Plants have a very complex and diverse influence on the climate system," says
study co-author Ken Caldeira of Carnegie's Department of Global Ecology.
"Plants take carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere, but they also have other
effects, such as changing the amount of evaporation from the land surface.
It's impossible to make good climate predictions without taking all of these
factors into account."

Plants give off water through tiny pores in their leaves, a process called
evapotranspiration that cools the plant, just as perspiration cools our
bodies. On a hot day, a tree can release tens of gallons of water into the
air, acting as a natural air conditioner for its surroundings. The plants
absorb carbon dioxide for photosynthesis through the same pores (called
stomata). But when carbon dioxide levels are high, the leaf pores shrink. This
causes less water to be released, diminishing the tree's cooling power.

The warming effects of carbon dioxide as a greenhouse gas have been known for
a long time, says Caldeira. But he and fellow Carnegie scientist Long Cao were
concerned that it is not as widely recognized that carbon dioxide also warms
our planet by its direct effects on plants. Previous work by Carnegie's Chris
Field and Joe Berry had indicated that the effects were important. "There is
no longer any doubt that carbon dioxide decreases evaporative cooling by
plants and that this decreased cooling adds to global warming," says Cao.
"This effect would cause significant warming even if carbon dioxide were not a
greenhouse gas."

In their model, the researchers doubled the concentration of atmospheric
carbon dioxide and recorded the magnitude and geographic pattern of warming
from different factors. They found that, averaged over the entire globe, the
evapotranspiration effects of plants account for 16% of warming of the land
surface, with greenhouse effects accounting for the rest. But in some regions,
such as parts of North America and eastern Asia, it can be more than 25% of
the total warming. "If we think of a doubling of carbon dioxide as causing
about four degrees of warming, in many places three of those degrees are
coming from the effect of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, and one is coming
from the direct effect of carbon dioxide on plants."

The researchers also found that their model predicted that high carbon dioxide
will increase the runoff from the land surface in most areas, because more
water from precipitation bypasses the plant cooling system and flows directly
to rivers and streams. Earlier models based on greenhouse effects of carbon
dioxide had also predicted higher runoff, but the new research predicts that
changes in evapotranspiration due to high carbon dioxide could have an even
stronger impact on water resources than those models predict.

"These results really show that how plants respond to carbon dioxide is very
important for making good climate predictions," says Caldeira. "So if we want
to improve climate predictions, we need to improve the representation of land
plants in the climate models. More broadly, it shows that the kind of
vegetation that's on the surface of our planet and what that vegetation is
doing is very important in determining our climate. We need to take great care
in considering what kind of changes we make to forests and other ecosystems,
because they are likely to have important climate consequences."

The study is published in the May 3-7 online edition of the _Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences_.

**Image caption:** Map of globe, showing percentage of predicted warming due
to the direct effect of carbon dioxide on plants. Carbon dioxide warms the
Earth because it is a greenhouse gas in the atmosphere, but it also causes
plants to provide less evaporative cooling. A study by Long Cao and Ken
Caldeira of the Carnegie Institution for Science finds that in some places
(darkest orange) over 25% of the warming from increased atmospheric carbon
dioxide is a result of decreased evaporative cooling by plants.

News Topic:

Climate Change

Ecology

  * 

## Resources For

  * Employees
  * Human Resources/Careers
  * Trustees
  * Visitors
  * Media Contacts
  * Anti-Discrimination Policy
  * Equal Employment Opportunity Policy

## Lectures & Events

  * Capital Science Evenings, D.C. 
  * Neighborhood Lecture Series, D.C.
  * Astronomy Lecture Series, CA
  * Rent DC Building

## Support our Work

  * Make a Donation
  * How to Give
  * What to Support
  * Planned Giving

## Who We Are

  * About
  * Departments
  * Careers & Internship 
  * Archives
  * Contact
  * Privacy Policy

## Departments

  * Embryology
  * Geophysical Laboratory
  * Global Ecology
  * Observatories
  * Plant Biology
  * Terrestrial Magnetism

  * Copyright 2019

  * Carnegie Institution for Science, 1530 P Street NW, Washington DC 20005 P: (202)-387-6400 F: (202)-387-8092

