

Jump to main content

An official website of the United States government.

We've made some changes to EPA.gov. If the information you are looking for is
not here, you may be able to find it on the EPA Web Archive or the January 19,
2017 Web Snapshot.

![](https://www.epa.gov/sites/all/themes/epa/logo.png)

# US EPA

United States Environmental Protection Agency

Search Search

## Main menu

  * Environmental Topics
    * Air
    * Bed Bugs
    * Chemicals and Toxics
    * Environmental Information by Location
    * Greener Living
    * Health
    * Land, Waste, and Cleanup
    * Lead
    * Mold
    * Pesticides
    * Radon
    * Science
    * Water
    * A-Z Index
  * Laws & Regulations
    * By Business Sector
    * By Topic
    * Compliance
    * Enforcement
    * Laws and Executive Orders
    * Policy and Guidance
    * Regulations
  * About EPA
    * EPA Administrator
    * Current Leadership
    * Organization Chart
    * Staff Directory
    * Planning, Budget and Results
    * Jobs and Internships
    * Headquarters Offices
    * Regional Offices
    * Labs and Research Centers

## Ozone Pollution and Your Patients' Health

Contact Us

Share

  *     *       *         * 

# What is Ozone?

  * What is ozone and where is it in the atmosphere?
  * Are high ambient ozone concentrations found only in heavily urbanized areas?
  * How does atmospheric ozone affect human health?

## What is ozone and where is it in the atmosphere?

Ozone (O3) is a highly reactive gas composed of three oxygen atoms. It is both
a natural and a man-made product that occurs in the Earth's upper atmosphere
![ozone

molecule](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2016-04/ozone_mol.jpg)(the
stratosphere) and lower atmosphere (the troposphere). Depending on where it is
in the atmosphere, ozone affects life on Earth in either good or bad ways.

Stratospheric ozone is formed naturally through the interaction of solar
ultraviolet (UV) radiation with molecular oxygen (O2). The "ozone layer,"
approximately 6 through 30 miles above the Earth's surface, reduces the amount
of harmful UV radiation reaching the Earth's surface.

Tropospheric or ground-level ozone – what we breathe – is formed primarily
from photochemical reactions between two major classes of air pollutants,
volatile organic compounds (VOC) and nitrogen oxides (NOx). These reactions
have traditionally been viewed as depending upon the presence of heat and
sunlight, resulting in higher ambient ozone concentrations in summer months.
Within the last decade, however, high ozone concentrations have also been
observed under specific circumstances in cold months, where a few high
elevation areas in the Western U.S. with high levels of local VOC and NOx
emissions have formed ozone when snow is on the ground and temperatures are
near or below freezing. Ozone contributes to what we typically experience as
"smog" or haze, which still occurs most frequently in the summertime, but can
occur throughout the year in some southern and mountain regions.

Although some stratospheric ozone is transported into the troposphere, and
some VOC and NOx occur naturally, the majority of ground-level ozone is the
result of reactions of man-made VOC and NOx. Significant sources of VOC are
chemical plants, gasoline pumps, oil-based paints, autobody shops, and print
shops. Nitrogen oxides result primarily from high temperature combustion.
Significant sources are power plants, industrial furnaces and boilers, and
motor vehicles.

## Are high ambient ozone concentrations found only in heavily urbanized

areas?

Many people mistakenly believe that tropospheric ozone concentrations are high
only in major urban areas, but high ambient ozone concentrations can and do
occur anywhere. Ozone formation is not limited to big cities like Los Angeles,
Houston, Atlanta, and New York City. It is also formed in smaller cities like
Raleigh, NC and Cincinnati, OH, and it is transported hundreds of miles
downwind from where it is created to affect ambient air quality in other urban
and rural areas. Where ozone is formed, peak concentrations usually occur
during afternoon hours, when sunlight is the most intense. However, areas
downwind of major sources of VOC and NOx may experience ozone peaks in the
afternoon and evening, after wind has carried ozone and its VOC and NOx
precursors many miles from their sources. Thus, high ozone concentrations can
occur in remote areas and at various times of day, including during the early
evening or night.

![U.S. counties with high ozone

concentrations](/sites/production/files/styles/large/public/2016-05/ozone_county_map_2009lg_0.jpg)**Figure
1: U.S. counties with high ozone concentrations in 2009.** This map depicts
ozone concentrations by U.S. county for 2009, showing where high ambient ozone
concentrations were found in the continental United States. The map's color
key is based on the categories of the Air Quality Index (AQI) (see Patient
Exposure and the Air Quality Index). All orange, red, and purple areas
exceeded the 8-hour ambient air quality standard for ozone during 2009. The
map illustrates how likely it may be for a particular area to experience air
quality advisories for ozone.

## How does atmospheric ozone affect human health?

Ozone has two properties of interest to human health. First, it absorbs UV
light, reducing human exposure to harmful UV radiation that causes skin cancer
and cataracts. Second, when inhaled, it reacts chemically with many biological
molecules in the respiratory tract, leading to a number of adverse health
effects. This course addresses this second property.

Review Key Points

## **PREVIOUS** | **NEXT**

Contact Us to ask a question, provide feedback, or report a problem.

## Ozone Pollution and Your Patients' Health

  * Course Home
  * About this Course
  * What is Ozone?
  * Health Effects in the General Population
  * Health Effects in Patients with Asthma
  * Patient Exposure and the Air Quality Index
  * Clinical Scenarios
  * Frequent Questions
  * Course Outline & Key Points
  * Review Questions
  * Course Evaluation
  * Patient Education Tools
  * References
  * Participation Certicate

Discover.

  * Accessibility
  * EPA Administrator
  * Budget & Performance
  * Contracting
  * Grants
  * January 19, 2017 Web Snapshot
  * No FEAR Act Data
  * Privacy
  * Privacy and Security Notice

Connect.

  * Data.gov
  * Inspector General
  * Jobs
  * Newsroom
  * Open Government
  * Regulations.gov
  * Subscribe
  * USA.gov
  * White House

Ask.

  * Contact EPA
  * Hotlines
  * FOIA Requests
  * Frequent Questions

Follow.

  * EPA's Facebook
  * EPA's Twitter
  * EPA's YouTube
  * EPA's Flickr
  * EPA's Instagram

Last updated on July 1, 2016

