

![This is a good article. Follow the link for more

information.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/9/94/Symbol_support_vote.svg/19px-

Symbol_support_vote.svg.png)

# Global dimming

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Reduction in the amount of sunlight reaching Earth's surface

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b3/Pollution_over_east_China.jpg/300px-

Pollution_over_east_China.jpg)

Dozens of fires burning on the surface (red dots) and a thick pall of smoke
and haze (greyish pixels) filling the skies overhead in Eastern China. Smoke,
pollution and other air particles are linked to global dimming. Photo taken by
MODIS aboard NASA's Aqua satellite.

**Global dimming** is the gradual reduction in the amount of global direct
irradiance at the Earth's surface that was observed for several decades after
the start of systematic measurements in the 1950s. The effect varies by
location, but worldwide it has been estimated to be of the order of a 4%
reduction over the three decades from 1960–1990. However, after discounting an
anomaly caused by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991, a very slight
reversal in the overall trend has been observed.[1]

Global dimming is thought to have been caused by an increase in particulates
such as sulfate aerosols in the atmosphere due to human action. It has
interfered with the hydrological cycle by reducing evaporation and may have
reduced rainfall in some areas. Global dimming also creates a cooling effect
that may have partially counteracted the effect of greenhouse gases on global
warming.

## Contents

  * 1 General
  * 2 Probable causes
    * 2.1 Contrails and clouds
  * 3 Recent reversal of the trend
  * 4 Relationship to global warming
  * 5 Relationship to hydrological cycle
  * 6 Possible use to mitigate global warming
  * 7 Research
  * 8 See also
  * 9 References
  * 10 External links

## General[edit]

Further information: Albedo, irradiance, insolation, and Anthropogenic cloud

It is thought that global dimming is probably due to the increased presence of
aerosol particles in Earth's atmosphere, caused by pollution, dust, or
volcanic eruptions.[2] Aerosols and other particulates absorb solar energy and
reflect sunlight back into space. The pollutants can also become nuclei for
cloud droplets. Water droplets in clouds coalesce around the particles.[3]
Increased pollution causes more particulates and thereby creates clouds
consisting of a greater number of smaller droplets (that is, the same amount
of water is spread over more droplets). The smaller droplets make clouds more
reflective, so that more incoming sunlight is reflected back into space and
less reaches the Earth's surface. This same effect also reflects radiation
from below, trapping it in the lower atmosphere. In models, these smaller
droplets also decrease rainfall.[4]

Clouds intercept both heat from the sun and heat radiated from the Earth.
Their effects are complex and vary in time, location, and altitude. Usually
during the daytime the interception of sunlight predominates, giving a cooling
effect; however, at night the re-radiation of heat to the Earth slows the
Earth's heat loss.[ _citation needed_ ]

## Probable causes[edit]

Further information: Particulate, Black carbon, Contrail, and Volcanic ash

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/82/Sfc.contrail.1.26.01.JPG/220px-

Sfc.contrail.1.26.01.JPG)

NASA photograph showing aircraft contrails and natural clouds. The temporary
disappearance of contrails over North America due to plane groundings after
the September 11, 2001 attacks, and the resulting increase in diurnal
temperature range gave empirical evidence of the effect of thin ice clouds at
the Earth's surface.[5]

The incomplete combustion of fossil fuels (such as diesel) and wood releases
black carbon into the air. Though black carbon, most of which is soot, is an
extremely small component of air pollution at land surface levels, the
phenomenon has a significant heating effect on the atmosphere at altitudes
above two kilometers (6,562 ft). Also, it dims the surface of the ocean by
absorbing solar radiation.[6]

Experiments in the Maldives (comparing the atmosphere over the northern and
southern islands) in the 1990s showed that the effect of macroscopic
pollutants in the atmosphere at that time (blown south from India) caused
about a 10% reduction in sunlight reaching the surface in the area under the
Asian brown cloud -- a much greater reduction than expected from the presence
of the particles themselves.[7] Prior to the research being undertaken,
predictions were of a 0.5–1% effect from particulate matter; the variation
from prediction may be explained by cloud formation with the particles acting
as the focus for droplet creation.

The phenomenon underlying global dimming may also have regional effects. While
most of the earth has warmed, the regions that are downwind from major sources
of air pollution (specifically sulfur dioxide emissions) have generally
cooled. This may explain the cooling of the eastern United States relative to
the warming western part.[8]

However some research shows that black carbon will increase global warming,
being second only to CO2. They believe that soot will absorb solar energy and
transport it to other areas such as the Himalayas where glacial melting
occurs. It can also darken Arctic ice reducing reflectivity and increasing
absorption of solar radiation.[9]

Airborne volcanic ash can reflect the Sun's rays back into space and thereby
contribute to cooling the planet. Dips in earth temperatures have been
observed after large volcano eruptions such as Mount Agung in Bali that
erupted in 1963, El Chichon (Mexico) 1983, Ruiz (Colombia) 1985, and Pinatubo
(Philippines) 1991. But even for major eruptions, the ash clouds remain only
for relatively short periods.[2] It has also been theorized that today's rapid
climate change may increase volcanic activity.[10]

### Contrails and clouds[edit]

A study theorized that aircraft contrails (also called vapor trails) are
implicated in regional cooling, but the constant flow of air traffic
previously meant that this could not be tested. The near-total shutdown of
civil air traffic during the three days following the September 11, 2001
attacks afforded a unique opportunity in which to observe the climate of the
United States absent from the effect of contrails. During this period, an
increase in diurnal temperature variation of 1.1 °C (1.8 °F) was observed in
some parts of the U.S., i.e. aircraft contrails may have been raising
nighttime temperatures and/or lowering daytime temperatures by much more than
previously thought.[5] However, a follow-up study attributed cloud cover to
the temperature change. The authors wrote, "The variations in high cloud
cover, including contrails and contrail-induced cirrus clouds, contribute
weakly to the changes in the diurnal temperature range, which is governed
primarily by lower altitude clouds, winds, and humidity."[11]

## Recent reversal of the trend[edit]

Further information: Clean Air Act (United States)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/79/Aerosol_dimming.jpg)

Sun-blocking aerosols around the world steadily declined (red line) since the
1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo, according to satellite estimates. Credit:
Michael Mishchenko, NASA

Wild _et al._ , using measurements over land, report brightening since
1990,[12][13][14] and Pinker _et al._ [15] found that slight dimming continued
over land while brightening occurred over the ocean.[16] Hence, over the land
surface, Wild _et al._ and Pinker _et al._ disagree. A 2007 NASA sponsored
satellite-based study sheds light on the puzzling observations by other
scientists that the amount of sunlight reaching Earth's surface had been
steadily declining in recent decades, began to reverse around 1990. This
switch from a "global dimming" trend to a "brightening" trend happened just as
global aerosol levels started to decline.[2][17]

It is likely that at least some of this change, particularly over Europe, is
due to decreases in airborne pollution. Most governments of developed nations
have taken steps to reduce aerosols released into the atmosphere, which helps
reduce global dimming.

Sulfate aerosols have declined significantly since 1970 with the Clean Air Act
in the United States and similar policies in Europe. The Clean Air Act was
strengthened in 1977 and 1990. According to the EPA, from 1970 to 2005, total
emissions of the six principal air pollutants, including PM’s, dropped by 53%
in the US. In 1975, the masked effects of trapped greenhouse gases finally
started to emerge and have dominated ever since.[18]

The Baseline Surface Radiation Network (BSRN) has been collecting surface
measurements. BSRN was started in the early 1990s and updated the archives in
this time. Analysis of recent data reveals that the surface of the planet has
brightened by about 4% in the past decade. The brightening trend is
corroborated by other data, including satellite analyses.

## Relationship to global warming[edit]

![Refer to caption and adjacent

text](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b4/Changes_in_total_solar_irradiance_and_monthly_sunspot_numbers%2C_1975-2013.png/350px-

Changes_in_total_solar_irradiance_and_monthly_sunspot_numbers%2C_1975-2013.png)

Changes in total solar irradiance (TSI) and monthly sunspot numbers since the
mid-1970s.

Further information: Global warming

Some scientists now consider that the effects of global dimming have masked
the effect of global warming to some extent and that resolving global dimming
may therefore lead to increases in predictions of future temperature rise.[19]
According to Beate Liepert, "We lived in a global warming plus a global
dimming world and now we are taking out global dimming. So we end up with the
global warming world, which will be much worse than we thought it will be,
much hotter."[20] The magnitude of this masking effect is one of the central
problems in current climate change with significant implications for future
climate changes and policy responses to global warming.[19]

Interactions between the two theories for climate modification have also been
studied, as global warming and global dimming are neither mutually exclusive
nor contradictory. In a paper published on March 8, 2005 in the American
Geophysical Union's Geophysical Research Letters, a research team led by
Anastasia Romanou of Columbia University's Department of Applied Physics and
Mathematics, New York, also showed that the apparently opposing forces of
global warming and global dimming can occur at the same time.[21] Global
dimming interacts with global warming by blocking sunlight that would
otherwise cause evaporation and the particulates bind to water droplets. Water
vapor is the major greenhouse gas. On the other hand, global dimming is
affected by evaporation and rain. Rain has the effect of clearing out polluted
skies.

Brown clouds have been found to amplify global warming according to
Veerabhadran Ramanathan, an atmospheric chemist at the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography in La Jolla, CA. "The conventional thinking is that brown clouds
have masked as much as 50 percent of global warming by greenhouse gases
through so-called global dimming... While this is true globally, this study
reveals that over southern and eastern Asia, the soot particles in the brown
clouds are in fact amplifying the atmospheric warming trend caused by
greenhouse gases by as much as 50 percent."[22]

## Relationship to hydrological cycle[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a2/Climate_Change_Attribution.png/250px-

Climate_Change_Attribution.png)

This figure shows the level of agreement between a climate model driven by
five factors and the historical temperature record. The negative component
identified as "sulfate" is associated with the aerosol emissions blamed for
global dimming.

Further information: Hydrological cycle

Pollution produced by humans may be seriously weakening the Earth's water
cycle -- reducing rainfall and threatening fresh water supplies. A 2001 study
by researchers at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography suggests that tiny
particles of soot and other pollutants have a significant effect on the
hydrological cycle. According to Veerabhadran Ramanathan, "the energy for the
hydrological cycle comes from sunlight. As sunlight heats the ocean, water
escapes into the atmosphere and falls out as rain. So as aerosols cut down
sunlight by large amounts, they may be spinning down the hydrological cycle of
the planet."[23]

Large scale changes in weather patterns may also have been caused by global
dimming. Climate modelers speculatively suggest that this reduction in solar
radiation at the surface may have led to the failure of the monsoon in sub-
Saharan Africa during the 1970s and 1980s, together with the associated
famines such as the Sahel drought, caused by Northern hemisphere pollution
cooling the Atlantic.[24] Because of this, the Tropical rain belt may not have
risen to its northern latitudes, thus causing an absence of seasonal rains.
This claim is not universally accepted and is very difficult to test. However
a 2009 Chinese study of 50 years of continuous data found that, though most
parts of eastern China saw no significant change in the amount of water held
by the atmosphere, light rains had decreased.[4] The researchers then modeled
the effect of aerosols and also concluded the overall effect was that water
drops in polluted cases are up to 50 percent smaller than in pristine skies.
They concluded smaller size impedes the formation of rain clouds, and the
falling of light rain is beneficial for agriculture. This was a different
effect than reducing solar irradiance, but still a direct result from the
presence of aerosols.

The 2001 study by researchers at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography
concluded that the imbalance between global dimming and global warming at the
surface leads to weaker turbulent heat fluxes to the atmosphere. This means
globally reduced evaporation and hence precipitation occur in a dimmer and
warmer world, which could ultimately lead to a more humid atmosphere in which
it rains less.[25]

A natural form of large scale environmental dimming effect on the development
of tropical cyclones originates from Sahara desert dust, when the drifting
sand and mineral particles laden air moves over the Atlantic Ocean. The
particles reflect and absorb sunlight, less sun rays reach Earth surface
layers, thus resulting in cooler water and land surface temperatures, and also
less cloud formation, subsequently dampening the development of
hurricanes.[26]

## Possible use to mitigate global warming[edit]

Further information: Solar radiation management, Mitigation of global warming,
and Albedo

Some scientists have suggested using aerosols to stave off the effects of
global warming as an emergency geoengineering measure.[27] In 1974, Mikhail
Budyko suggested that if global warming became a problem, the planet could be
cooled by burning sulfur in the stratosphere, which would create a
haze.[28][29] An increase in planetary albedo of just 0.5 percent is
sufficient to halve the effect of a CO2 doubling.[30]

The simplest solution would be to simply emit more sulfates, which would end
up in troposphere - the lowest part of the atmosphere. If this were done,
Earth would still face many problems, such as:

  * Using sulfates causes environmental problems such as acid rain[31]
  * Using carbon black causes human health problems[31]
  * Dimming causes ecological problems such as changes in evaporation and rainfall patterns[31]
  * Droughts and/or increased rainfall cause problems for agriculture[31]
  * Aerosol has a relatively short lifetime

The solution advocated is transporting sulfates into the next higher layer of
the atmosphere - stratosphere. Aerosols in the stratosphere last years instead
of weeks - so only a relatively smaller (though still large) amount of sulfate
emissions would be necessary, and side effects would be less. This would
require developing an efficient way to transport large amounts of gases into
stratosphere, many of which have been proposed though none are known to be
effective or economically viable.[32]

In a blog post, Gavin Schmidt stated that "Ideas that we should increase
aerosol emissions to counteract global warming have been described as a
'Faustian bargain' because that would imply an ever increasing amount of
emissions in order to match the accumulated greenhouse gas in the atmosphere,
with ever increasing monetary and health costs."[33]

## Research[edit]

Further information: Climate model and pyranometer

In the late-1960s, Mikhail Ivanovich Budyko worked with simple two-dimensional
energy-balance climate models to investigate the reflectivity of ice.[34] He
found that the ice-albedo feedback created a positive feedback loop in the
Earth's climate system. The more snow and ice, the more solar radiation is
reflected back into space and hence the colder Earth grows and the more it
snows. Other studies found that pollution or a volcano eruption could provoke
the onset of an ice age.[35][36]

In the 1980s, Atsumu Ohmura, a geography researcher at the Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology, found that solar radiation striking the Earth's
surface had declined by more than 10% over the three previous decades. His
findings appeared to contradict global warming — the global temperature had
been generally rising since the 70s. Less light reaching the earth seemed to
mean that it should cool.[37] This was soon followed by others: Viivi Russak
in 1990 "Trends of solar radiation, cloudiness and atmospheric transparency
during recent decades in Estonia",[38] and Beate Liepert in 1994 "Solar
radiation in Germany — Observed trends and an assessment of their causes".[39]
Dimming has also been observed in sites all over the former Soviet Union.[40]
Gerry Stanhill who studied these declines worldwide in many papers coined the
term "global dimming".[41]

Independent research in Israel and the Netherlands in the late 1980s showed an
apparent reduction in the amount of sunlight,[12] despite widespread evidence
that the climate was becoming hotter. The rate of dimming varies around the
world but is on average estimated at around 2–3% per decade. The trend
reversed in the early 1990s. [1] It is difficult to make a precise
measurement, due to the difficulty in accurately calibrating the instruments
used, and the problem of spatial coverage. Nonetheless, the effect is almost
certainly present.

The effect (2–3%, as above) is due to changes within the Earth's atmosphere;
the value of the solar radiation at the top of the atmosphere has not changed
by more than a fraction of this amount.[42]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/ec/Lightmatter_Golden_gate_bridge.jpg/300px-

Lightmatter_Golden_gate_bridge.jpg)

Smog, seen here at the Golden Gate Bridge, is a likely contributor to global
dimming.

The effect varies greatly over the planet, but estimates of the terrestrial
surface average value are:

  * 5.3% (9 W/m²); over 1958–85 (Stanhill and Moreshet, 1992)[41]
  * 2%/decade over 1964–93 (Gilgen _et al._ , 1998)[43]
  * 2.7%/decade (total 20 W/m²); up to 2000 (Stanhill and Cohen, 2001)[44]
  * 4% over 1961–90 (Liepert 2002)[45]

Note that these numbers are for the terrestrial surface and not really a
global average. Whether dimming (or brightening) occurred over the ocean has
been a bit of an unknown though a specific measurement measured effects some
400 miles (643.7 km) from India over the Indian Ocean towards the Maldives
Islands. Regional effects probably dominate but are not strictly confined to
the land area, and the effects will be driven by regional air circulation. A
2009 review by Wild et al.[46] found that widespread variation in regional and
time effects. There was solar brightening beyond 2000 at numerous stations in
Europe, the United States, and Korea. The brightening seen at sites in
Antarctica during the 1990s, influenced by recovering from the Mount Pinatubo
volcanic eruption in 1991, fades after 2000. The brightening tendency also
seems to level off at sites in Japan. In China there is some indication for a
renewed dimming, after the stabilization in the 1990s. A continuation of the
long-lasting dimming is also noted at the sites in India. Overall, the
available data suggest continuation of the brightening beyond the year 2000 at
numerous locations, yet less pronounced and coherent than during the 1990s,
with more regions with no clear changes or declines. Therefore, globally,
greenhouse warming after 2000 may be less modulated by surface solar
variations than in prior decades. The largest reductions are found in the
northern hemisphere mid-latitudes.[47] Visible light and infrared radiation
seem to be most affected rather than the ultraviolet part of the spectrum.[48]

## See also[edit]

  * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8c/Global_Warming_Map.jpg/32px-Global_Warming_Map.jpg)Global warming portal
  * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6a/Earth_Day_Flag.png/32px-Earth_Day_Flag.png)Ecology portal
  * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bf/Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg/32px-Aegopodium_podagraria1_ies.jpg)Environment portal
  * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/14/Crystal_energy.svg/29px-Crystal_energy.svg.png)Energy portal

  * Anthropogenic cloud

  * Nuclear winter
  * Asian brown cloud
  * Chemtrail conspiracy theory
  * Environmental impact of aviation
  * Global cooling
  * Iris hypothesis
  * Ship tracks
  * Snowball Earth
  * Sunshine recorders

## References[edit]

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hegerl, G. C.; Zwiers, F. W.; Braconnot, P.; et al. (2007). "Chapter 9, Understanding and Attributing Climate Change - Section 9.2.2 Spatial and Temporal Patterns of the Response to Different Forcings and their Uncertainties" (PDF). In Solomon, S.; Qin, D.; Manning, M.; Chen, Z.; Marquis, M.; Averyt, K.B.; Tignor, M.; Miller, H.L. (eds.). _Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change_. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved 2008-04-13. "See 9.2.2.2"
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Global 'Sunscreen' Has Likely Thinned, Report NASA Scientists". NASA. 2007-03-15.
  3. **^** "The Physical Basis for Seeding Clouds". Atmospherics Inc. 1996. Archived from the original on 2008-04-08. Retrieved 2008-04-03.
  4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Yun Qian; Daoyi Gong; et al. (2009). "The Sky Is Not Falling: Pollution in eastern China cuts light, useful rainfall". Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. Retrieved 2009-08-16.
  5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Travis, David J.; Carleton, Andrew M.  & Lauritsen, Ryan G (2002). "Contrails reduce daily temperature range" (PDF). _Nature_. **418** (6898): 601. Bibcode:2002Natur.418..601T. doi:10.1038/418601a. PMID 12167846. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 3, 2006.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  6. **^** "Transported Black Carbon A Significant Player In Pacific Ocean Climate". Science Daily. 2007-03-15.
  7. **^** J. Srinivasan; et al. (2002). "Asian Brown Cloud – fact and fantasy" (PDF). _Current Science_. **83** (5): 586–592.
  8. **^** "Crichton's Thriller State of Fear: Separating Fact from Fiction". Archived from the original on 2006-06-14. Retrieved 2006-06-12.
  9. **^** Ramanathan, V.; Carmichael, G. (2008). "Nature Geoscience: Global and regional climate changes due to black carbon". _Nature Geoscience_. **1** (4): 221–227. doi:10.1038/ngeo156.
  10. **^** Bill McGuire (volcanologist) (2016). "How climate change triggers earthquakes, tsunamis and volcanoes". The Guardian.
  11. **^** Hong; et al. (2008). "Do contrails significantly reduce daily temperature range?" (PDF). _Geophysical Research Letters_. doi:10.1029/2008GL036108,2008 (inactive 2019-02-02).
  12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Earth lightens up". _Pacific Northwest National Laboratory_. Retrieved May 8, 2005.
  13. **^** Wild, M; et al. (2005). "From Dimming to Brightening: Decadal Changes in Solar Radiation at Earth's Surface". _Science_. **308** (2005–05–06): 847–850. Bibcode:2005Sci...308..847W. doi:10.1126/science.1103215. PMID 15879214.
  14. **^** Wild, M., A. Ohmura, and K. Makowski (2007). "Impact of global dimming and brightening on global warming". _Geophysical Research Letters_. **34** (4): L04702. Bibcode:2007GeoRL..3404702W. doi:10.1029/2006GL028031. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  15. **^** Pinker; Zhang, B; Dutton, EG; et al. (2005). "Do Satellites Detect Trends in Surface Solar Radiation?". _Science_. **308** (6 May 2005): 850–854. Bibcode:2005Sci...308..850P. doi:10.1126/science.1103159. PMID 15879215.
  16. **^** "Global Dimming may have a brighter future". Retrieved 2006-06-12.
  17. **^** Richard A. Kerr (2007-03-16). "Climate change: Is a Thinning Haze Unveiling the Real Global Warming?". _Science_. **315** (5818): 1480. doi:10.1126/science.315.5818.1480. PMID 17363636.
  18. **^** "Air Emissions Trends - Continued Progress Through 2005". 2014-07-08.
  19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Andreae O. M.; Jones C. D.; Cox P. M. (2005). "Strong present-day aerosol cooling implies a hot future". _Nature_. **435** (7046): 1187–1190. Bibcode:2005Natur.435.1187A. doi:10.1038/nature03671. PMID 15988515.
  20. **^** "Global Dimming". BBC. Retrieved 6 April 2009.
  21. **^** Alpert, P., P. Kishcha, Y. J. Kaufman, and R. Schwarzbard (2005). "Global dimming or local dimming?: Effect of urbanization on sunlight availability". _Geophys. Res. Lett._ **32** (17): L17802. Bibcode:2005GeoRL..3217802A. doi:10.1029/2005GL023320. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  22. **^** National Science Foundation (2007-08-01). " "Brown Cloud" Particulate Pollution Amplifies Global Warming". Retrieved 2008-04-03.
  23. **^** Cat Lazaroff (2007-12-07). "Aerosol Pollution Could Drain Earth's Water Cycle". Environment News Service.
  24. **^** Rotstayn and Lohmann; Lohmann, Ulrike (2002). "Tropical Rainfall Trends and the Indirect Aerosol Effect". _Journal of Climate_. **15** (15): 2103–2116. Bibcode:2002JCli...15.2103R. doi:10.1175/1520-0442(2002)015 <2103:TRTATI>2.0.CO;2.
  25. **^** Kostel, Ken; Oh, Clare (2006-04-14). "Could Reducing Global Dimming Mean a Hotter, Dryer World?". Lamont–Doherty Earth Observatory News. Retrieved 2006-06-12.
  26. **^** Pan, Bowen; Wang, Yuan; Hu, Jiaxi; Lin, Yun; Hsieh, Jen-Shan; Logan, Timothy; Feng, Xidan; Jiang, Jonathan H.; Yung, Yuk L.; Zhang, Renyi (2018). "Sahara dust may make you cough, but it's a storm killer". _Journal of Climate_. **31** (18): 7621–7644. doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-16-0776.1.
  27. **^** William J. Broad (27 June 2006). "How to Cool a Planet (Maybe)". _The New York Times_. Retrieved 6 April 2009.
  28. **^** Spencer Weart (July 2006). "Aerosols: Effects of Haze and Cloud". _The Discovery of Global Warming_. American Institute of Physics. Retrieved 6 April 2009.
  29. **^** Crutzen, P. (August 2006). "Albedo enhancement by stratospheric sulfur injections: a contribution to resolve a policy dilemma?" (PDF). _Climatic Change_. **77** (3–4): 211–220. doi:10.1007/s10584-006-9101-y.
  30. **^** Ramanathan, V. (1988-04-15). "The greenhouse theory of climate change: a test by an inadvertent global experiment". _Science_. **240** (4850): 293–299. Bibcode:1988Sci...240..293R. doi:10.1126/science.240.4850.293. PMID 17796737.
  31. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Ramanathan, V. (2006). "Atmospheric Brown Clouds: Health, Climate and Agriculture Impacts" (PDF). _Pontifical Academy of Sciences Scripta Varia (Pontifica Academia Scientiarvm)_. **106** (Interactions Between Global Change and Human Health): 47–60. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-07-30.
  32. **^** GRLreview, Rutgers Edu.
  33. **^** "RealClimate: Global Dimming?". 2005-01-18. Retrieved 2007-04-05.
  34. **^** Budyko, M.I. (1969). "The effect of solar radiation variations on the climate of the Earth". _Tellus_. **21** (5): 611–619. Bibcode:1969TellA..21..611B. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.696.824. doi:10.1111/j.2153-3490.1969.tb00466.x. Archived from the original on 2007-10-15.
  35. **^** Rasool, Ichtiaque, S. and Schneider, Stephen H. (July 1971). "Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide and Aerosols: Effects of Large Increases on Global Climate". _Science_. **173** (3992): 138–141. Bibcode:1971Sci...173..138R. doi:10.1126/science.173.3992.138. PMID 17739641. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  36. **^** Lockwood, John G. (1979). _Causes of Climate_. Lecture Notes in mathematics 1358. New York: John Wiley  & Sons. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-470-26657-1.
  37. **^** Ohmura, A.; Lang, H. (June 1989). Lenoble, J.; Geleyn, J.-F. (eds.). _Secular variation of global radiation in Europe. In IRS '88: Current Problems in Atmospheric Radiation, A. Deepak Publ., Hampton, VA_. , Hampton, VA: Deepak Publ. pp. (635) pp. 298–301. ISBN 978-0-937194-16-4.
  38. **^** Russak, V. (1990). "Trends of solar radiation, cloudiness and atmospheric transparency during recent decades in Estonia". _Tellus B_. **42** (2): 206–210. Bibcode:1990TellB..42..206R. doi:10.1034/j.1600-0889.1990.t01-1-00006.x. 1990TellB..42..206R.
  39. **^** Liepert, B. G., P. Fabian; et al. (1994). "Solar radiation in Germany - Observed trends and an assessment of their causes. Part 1. Regional approach". _Contr. Atm. Physics_. **67** : 15–29.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  40. **^** Abakumova, G.M.; et al. (1996). "Evaluation of long-term changes in radiation, cloudiness and surface temperature on the territory of the former Soviet Union" (PDF). _Journal of Climate_. **9** (6): 1319–1327. Bibcode:1996JCli....9.1319A. doi:10.1175/1520-0442(1996)009 <1319:EOLTCI>2.0.CO;2.
  41. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Stanhill, G.; Moreshet, S. (2004-11-06). "Global radiation climate changes in Israel". _Climatic Change_. **22** (2): 121–138. Bibcode:1992ClCh...22..121S. doi:10.1007/BF00142962.
  42. **^** Eddy, John A. Gilliland, Ronald L.  & Hoyt, Douglas V. (1982-12-23). "Changes in the solar constant and climatic effects". _Nature_. **300** (5894): 689–693. Bibcode:1982Natur.300..689E. doi:10.1038/300689a0. " Spacecraft measurements have established that the total radiative output of the Sun varies at the 0.1−0.3% level"CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  43. **^** H. Gilgen; M. Wild; A. Ohmura (1998). "Means and trends of shortwave irradiance at the surface estimated from global energy balance archive data" (PDF). _Journal of Climate_. **11** (8): 2042–2061. Bibcode:1998JCli...11.2042G. doi:10.1175/1520-0442-11.8.2042.
  44. **^** Stanhill, G.; S. Cohen (2001). "Global dimming: a review of the evidence for a widespread and significant reduction in global radiation with discussion of its probable causes and possible agricultural consequences". _Agricultural and Forest Meteorology_. **107** (4): 255–278. Bibcode:2001AgFM..107..255S. doi:10.1016/S0168-1923(00)00241-0.
  45. **^** Liepert, B. G. (2002-05-02). "Observed Reductions in Surface Solar Radiation in the United States and Worldwide from 1961 to 1990" (PDF). _Geophysical Research Letters_. **29** (12): 61–1–61–4. Bibcode:2002GeoRL..29.1421L. doi:10.1029/2002GL014910.
  46. **^** Wild, Martin; Trüssel, Barbara; Ohmura, Atsumu; Long, Charles N.; König-Langlo, Gert; Dutton, Ellsworth G.; Tsvetkov, Anatoly (2009-05-16). "Global dimming and brightening: An update beyond 2000". _Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres_. **114** : D00D13. Bibcode:2009JGRD..11400D13W. doi:10.1029/2008JD011382.
  47. **^** R. E. Carnell; C. A. Senior (April 1998). "Changes in mid-latitude variability due to increasing greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols". _Climate Dynamics Springer Berlin / Heidelberg_. **14** (5): 369–383. Bibcode:1998ClDy...14..369C. doi:10.1007/s003820050229.
  48. **^** Adam, David (2003-12-18). "Goodbye sunshine". _Guardian News and Media Limited_. Retrieved 2009-08-26.

## External links[edit]

  * Global Aerosol Climatology Project

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/24/Wikinews-

logo.svg/40px-Wikinews-logo.svg.png) | Wikinews has related news: _**PBS show
asserts greenhouse gases, atmospheric pollutants dimming future**_  
---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/df/Wikibooks-logo-en-

noslogan.svg/40px-Wikibooks-logo-en-noslogan.svg.png) | Wikibooks has a book
on the topic of: _**Climate Change**_  
---|--- 

  * v
  * t
  * e

Global warming and climate change

* * *

|

Temperatures

* * *

  * Brightness temperature
  * Effective temperature
  * Geologic record
  * Hiatus
  * Historical climatology
  * Instrumental record
  * Paleoclimatology
  * Paleotempestology
  * Proxy data
  * Record of the past 1,000 years
  * Satellite measurements

|

Causes

* * *

| Anthropogenic  
(caused by human activity)|

  * Attribution of recent climate change
  * Aviation
  * Biofuel
  * Black carbon
  * Carbon dioxide
  * Deforestation
  * Earth's energy budget
  * Ecocide
  * Fossil fuel
  * Global dimming
  * Global warming potential
  * Greenhouse effect
  * (Infrared window)
  * Greenhouse gases
  * Land use, land-use change, and forestry
  * Radiative forcing
  * Tropospheric ozone

---|---  
Natural|

  * Albedo
  * Bond events
  * Climate oscillations
  * Climate sensitivity
  * Cloud forcing
  * Cosmic rays
  * Feedbacks
  * Glaciation
  * Global cooling
  * Milankovitch cycles
  * Ocean variability
    * AMO
    * ENSO
    * IOD
    * PDO
  * Orbital forcing
  * Solar variation
  * Volcanism

Models|

  * Global climate model

|

History

* * *

  * History of climate change science
  * Atmospheric thermodynamics
  * Svante Arrhenius
  * James Hansen
  * Charles David Keeling

|

Opinion and climate change

* * *

| General|

  * Environmental ethics
  * Media coverage of climate change
  * Public opinion on climate change
  * (Popular culture)
  * Scientific opinion on climate change
  * Scientists who disagree with the mainstream assessment
  * Climate change denial
  * Global warming conspiracy theory

---|---  
By country & region|

  * Africa
  * Arctic
  * Argentina
  * Australia
  * Bangladesh
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * China
  * Europe
  * European Union
  * Finland
  * Grenada
  * India
  * Japan
  * Luxembourg
  * New Zealand
  * Norway
  * Russia
  * Scotland
  * South Korea
  * Sweden
  * Tuvalu
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

|

Politics

* * *

|

  * Clean Power Plan
  * Climate change denial
  * (Manufactured controversy)
  * Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
  * March for Science
  * People's Climate March
  * United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC / FCCC)
  * Global climate regime

* * *

|

Potential effects and issues

* * *

| General|

  * Abrupt climate change
  * Anoxic event
  * Arctic dipole anomaly
  * Arctic haze
  * Arctic methane emissions
  * Central American dry corridor
  * Climate change and agriculture
  * Climate change and ecosystems
  * Climate change and gender
  * Climate change and poverty
  * Drought
  * Economics of global warming
  * Effects on plant biodiversity
  * Effects on health
  * Effects on humans
  * Effects on marine mammals
  * Environmental migrant
  * Extinction risk from global warming
  * Fisheries and climate change
  * Forest dieback
  * Industry and society
  * Iris hypothesis
  * Megadrought
  * Ocean acidification
  * Ozone depletion
  * Physical impacts
  * Polar stratospheric cloud
  * Regime shift
  * Retreat of glaciers since 1850
  * Runaway climate change
  * Sea level rise
  * Season creep
  * Shutdown of thermohaline circulation
  * Surf breaks and waves

---|---  
By country|

  * Australia
  * South Asia
    * India
    * Nepal
  * United States

|

Mitigation

* * *

| Kyoto Protocol|

  * Clean Development Mechanism
  * Joint Implementation
  * Bali Road Map
  * 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference

---|---  
Governmental|

  * European Climate Change Programme
  * G8 Climate Change Roundtable
  * United Kingdom Climate Change Programme
  * Paris Agreement
    * United States withdrawal
  * Regional climate change initiatives in the United States
  * List of climate change initiatives

Emissions reduction|

  * Carbon credit
  * Carbon-neutral fuel
  * Carbon offset
  * Carbon tax
  * Emissions trading
  * Fossil fuel phase-out

Carbon-free energy|

  * Efficient energy use
  * Renewable energy
  * Low-carbon economy
  * Nuclear power
  * Carbon capture and storage

Personal|

  * Individual action on climate change
  * Simple living

Other|

  * Carbon dioxide removal
  * Carbon sink
  * Climate action
  * Climate Action Plan
  * Climate change mitigation scenarios
  * Climate engineering
  * Individual and political action on climate change
  * Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
  * Reforestation
  * Urban reforestation

|

Proposed adaptations

* * *

| Strategies|

  * Damming glacial lakes
  * Desalination
  * Drought tolerance
  * Irrigation investment
  * Rainwater storage
  * Sustainable development
  * Weather modification

---|---  
Programmes|

  * Land allocation decision support system

  * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Glossary

  * ![List-Class article](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/d/db/Symbol_list_class.svg/16px-Symbol_list_class.svg.png) Index
  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Climate change
  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Global warming
  * ![Portal](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/fd/Portal-puzzle.svg/16px-Portal-puzzle.svg.png) Portal

  * v

  * t
  * e

Pollution

* * *

Air pollution|

  * Acid rain
  * Air quality index
  * Atmospheric dispersion modeling
  * Chlorofluorocarbon
  * Indoor air quality
  * Global dimming
  * Global distillation
  * Global warming
  * Ozone depletion
  * Atmospheric particulate matter
  * Smog

Water pollution|

  * Environmental impact of pharmaceuticals and personal care products
  * Environmental impact of shipping
  * Environmental monitoring
  * Eutrophication
  * Freshwater environmental quality parameters
  * Groundwater pollution
  * Hypoxia
  * Marine debris
  * Marine pollution
  * Nutrient pollution
  * Ocean acidification
  * Oil spill
  * Septic tank
  * Surface runoff
  * Thermal pollution
  * Turbidity
  * Urban runoff
  * Wastewater
  * Water quality
  * Water stagnation
  * Waterborne diseases

Soil contamination|

  * Bioremediation
  * Electrical resistance heating
  * Herbicide
  * Open defecation
  * Pesticide
  * Phytoremediation
  * Soil Guideline Values (SGVs)

Radioactive contamination|

  * Actinides in the environment
  * Bioremediation of radioactive waste
  * Environmental radioactivity
  * Fission product
  * Nuclear fallout
  * Plutonium in the environment
  * Radiation poisoning
  * Radium in the environment
  * Uranium in the environment

Other types of pollution|

  * Land degradation
  * Light pollution
  * Pollution from nanomaterials
  * Noise pollution
  * Radio spectrum pollution
  * Urban heat island
  * Visual pollution

Inter-government treaties|

  * Basel Convention
  * CLRTAP
  * Kyoto Protocol
  * MARPOL Convention
  * Montreal Protocol
  * OSPAR
  * Rotterdam Convention
  * Stockholm Convention

Major organizations|

  * Basel Action Network
  * Central Pollution Control Board (India)
  * DEFRA
  * Environment Agency (England)
  * Scottish Environment Protection Agency
  * U.S. EPA
  * European Environment Agency
  * Greenpeace

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Global_dimming&oldid=900011718"

Categories:

  * Climate change
  * Global environmental issues

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
  * Pages with DOIs inactive as of 2019
  * Articles with short description
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019
  * Good articles

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * العربية
  * Беларуская
  * Català
  * Čeština
  * Deutsch
  * Ελληνικά
  * Español
  * Euskara
  * فارسی
  * Français
  * Galego
  * 한국어
  * हिन्दी
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * Magyar
  * മലയാളം
  * مصرى
  * Nederlands
  * 日本語
  * Norsk
  * Norsk nynorsk
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Română
  * Русский
  * Саха тыла
  * Shqip
  * සිංහල
  * Simple English
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * தமிழ்
  * Українська
  * Tiếng Việt
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 2 June 2019, at 21:35 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

