

Accessibility links

  * Skip to article
  * Skip to navigation

![](/template/ver1-0/i/telegraph_print_190.gif)

Telegraph.co.uk

Friday 07 June 2019

  * Home
  * Video
  * News
  * World
  * Sport
  * Business
  * Money
  * Comment
  * Culture
  * Travel
  * Life
  * Women
  * Fashion
  * Luxury
  * Tech
  * Film

  * Blog

  * Columnists
  * Personal View
  * Telegraph View
  * Letters
  * Cartoon Archive
  * My Telegraph
  * Politics

Advertisement

  1. Home»
  2. Comment»
  3. Columnists»
  4. Christopher Booker

# Global cooling hits Al Gore's home

## Nashville, the home of leading global warming prophet Al Gore, has enjoyed

the coolest July 21 on record, observes Christopher Booker.

![Al

Gore](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01450/algore_1450239c.jpg)

Al Gore, obscured by snow Photo: AP

By Christopher Booker

5:17PM BST 25 Jul 2009

It was delightfully appropriate that, as large parts of Argentina were swept
by severe blizzards last week, on a scale never experienced before, the city
of Nashville, Tennessee, should have enjoyed the coolest July 21 in its
history, breaking a record established in 1877. Appropriate, because Nashville
is the home of Al Gore, the man who for 20 years has been predicting that we
should all by now be in the grip of runaway global warming.

His predictions have proved so wildly wrong - along with those of the Met
Office's £33 million computer model which forecast that we should now be
enjoying a "barbecue summer" and that 2009 would be one of "the five warmest
years ever" - that the propaganda machine has had to work overtime to maintain
what is threatening to become the most expensive fiction in history.

The two official sources of satellite data on global temperatures, for
instance, lately announced that June temperatures had again fallen, to their
average level for the month over the 30 years since satellite data began. By
contrast, the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, run by Mr Gore's closest
ally and scientific adviser, James Hansen - one of the two official sources of
global temperature data from surface weather stations - announced that in that
single month the world had warmed by a staggering 0.63 degrees C, more than
its net warming for the entire 20th century.

In the past few years, Dr Hansen's temperature record has become ever more
eccentric, often wildly at odds with the other three officially recognised
data sources, all of which showed a dramatic drop in temperatures in 2007
leading to markedly cooler summers and two of the coldest and snowiest winters
the world has known for decades. All this has equally made nonsense of the
predictions of the computer models that the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change relies on, which are programmed to assume that temperatures
should soar in line with rising levels of greenhouse gases.

Carbon dioxide levels continue to rise, but temperatures - apart from those
revealed by Dr Hansen - have seriously parted company with them. This has not
prevented the propaganda machine's media groupies continuing to peddle a daily
stream of stories about how in all directions global warming is already
affecting the world for the worse.

## Related Articles

  * Secret vote keeps EU whistleblower from office

25 Jul 2009

Soay sheep are shrinking in size (I am sure they've really noticed the global
warming up on that bleak Scottish islet). The tiny Pacific nation of Tuvalu,
we are yet again told, is pleading for international aid, as it sinks below
the rising ocean - even though an expert study in 2001 showed that sea levels
around Tuvalu have in fact been falling for 50 years. Even a report on the
record number of Painted Lady butterflies in Britain this summer cannot resist
ending with a ritual forecast that many butterfly species will soon disappear
because of "climate change".

Meanwhile even America's foremost pro-warmist scientific blog, RealClimate -
run by, among others, Dr Michael Mann of "hockey stick" fame - concedes that
global temperatures are not only declining but are likely to continue to do so
for at least another decade - after which, of course, they will leap up again
higher than ever.

None of this is proving of much assistance to the politicians still
desperately hoping to reach agreement on a new climate treaty in Copenhagen in
December. With the still-developing countries, led by China, India, Russia and
Brazil, all saying that they will only co-operate if rich governments such as
the US and the EU compensate them to the tune of trillions of dollars a year,
the chances of any meaningful successor to the Kyoto Protocol look like zero.
(India's environment minister delights these days in saying that his country
has no intention of sabotaging its fast-growing economy by agreeing to curb
its CO2 emissions.)

But we are already committed, in any case, to paying out barely credible sums
for our blind faith in global warming (quite apart from the £100 billion
Gordon Brown wants us to spend on 10,000 more useless windmills, most of which
he hasn't got a hope of seeing built).

A new study by an Australian analyst, Joanne Nova, based on official figures
(available at the website of the Science and Public Policy Institute), shows
that since 1991 US federal spending alone on climate change has been $79
billion. The cost of international carbon trading in 2008 was a staggering
$126 billion, and is soon likely to run into trillions, making buying and
selling the right to emit CO2 "the largest single commodity traded" in the
world. Yet for all that money (along with countless billions more spent in
Britain and elsewhere), "no one is able to point to a single piece of evidence
that man-made carbon dioxide has a significant effect on global climate".

Are we all missing something - apart from all that money, of course?

**The Afghan catastrophe we didn't hear about**

In May I reported that the Taliban had a new strategy. Their latest ambition,
three times scotched by US air attacks, was to score a major propaganda
victory by shooting down a large British helicopter, preferably full of men.
Eleven days ago they got their way. However, we didn 't hear much about it
because the helicopter was not a Chinook but a giant Russian-built Mi-26T,
shot down when it was ferrying supplies to the British base at Sangin, with
seven dead.

The reason we didn't hear about it was that the dead were not British but
Ukrainians, and the helicopter was only under contract to the Ministry of
Defence. It was operated by a Moldovan charter company which has been
implicated in illegal gun-running and which, on safety grounds, is banned from
flying in EU air space.

We know the shortage of British helicopters in Afghanistan has become a
burning political issue, but what on earth was the MoD doing hiring one from
such a source in the first place? And what would be the British public's
response if the Taliban next time manage to down their real target: a Chinook
with up to 40 men on board?

## Christopher Booker

  * ### Green Politics »

  * ### Comment »

  * ### Personal View »

In Christopher Booker

![Michael Eavis and solar

panels](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01761/bookersolar_1761236g.jpg)

### The climate change scare is dying, but do our MPs notice?

![Rajendra

Pachauri](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01730/rajendra-

pachauri_1730615g.jpg)

### The 'anomalies' of Dr Pachauri's charity accounts

![India's space

program](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01745/india-

space_1745675g.jpg)

### The 'cuts' that mean public spending soars

Top News Galleries

Advertisement

![](http://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/imp.gif?client=ca-

telegraph_uk_420x200&event=noscript)

![Follow The Telegraph on social

media](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01964/socialMedia_puff_3_1964870a.jpg)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

MORE

### Moderation FAQs

  * **How we moderate reader comments**

News

![Progress 17 supply vehicle departs from the International Space

Station](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03285/Progress_17__3285797f.jpg)

### The latest news, opinion and analysis

View

Football

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03101/old-

trafford_3101399f.jpg)

### Catch up on all the latest football news and results

View

Film

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03208/oscars-

summary-2_3208754f.jpg)

### All the latest film trailers, reviews and features

View

Competitions

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03614/Malta-

TD_3614608f.jpg)

### Enter one of our exciting new competitions

View

Back to top

  * HOME
  * News
  * World News
  * Obituaries

  * Travel

  * Health

  * Jobs

  * Sport

  * Football
  * Cricket
  * Fantasy Football

  * Culture

  * Motoring

  * Dating

  * Finance

  * Personal Finance
  * Economics
  * Markets

  * Fashion

  * Property

  * Puzzles

  * Comment

  * My Telegraph
  * Letters
  * Columnists

  * Technology

  * Gardening

  * Telegraph Shop

  * Contact us

  * Privacy and Cookies
  * Guidelines
  * Advertising

  * Tickets

  * Announcements

  * Reader Prints
  *   * Follow Us

  * Apps
  * Epaper
  * Expat

  * Promotions

  * Subscriber
  * Syndication

(C) Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2019

Terms and Conditions

Today's News

Archive

Style Book

Weather Forecast

![](//secure-uk.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=uk-101665h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

