

Accessibility links

  * Skip to article
  * Skip to navigation

![](/template/ver1-0/i/telegraph_print_190.gif)

Telegraph.co.uk

Wednesday 05 June 2019

  * Home
  * Video
  * News
  * World
  * Sport
  * Business
  * Money
  * Comment
  * Culture
  * Travel
  * Life
  * Women
  * Fashion
  * Luxury
  * Tech
  * Film

  * Politics

  * Investigations
  * Obits
  * Education
  * Science
  * Earth
  * Weather
  * Health
  * Royal
  * Celebrity
  * Defence
  * Scotland

  * Science News

  * Dinosaurs
  * Space
  * Night Sky
  * Evolution
  * Picture Galleries
  * Science Video

Advertisement

  1. Home»
  2. News»
  3. Science»
  4. Science News

# The truth about global warming - it's the Sun that's to blame

By Michael Leidig and Roya Nikkhah

12:01AM BST 18 Jul 2004

Global warming has finally been explained: the Earth is getting hotter because
the Sun is burning more brightly than at any time during the past 1,000 years,
according to new research.

A study by Swiss and German scientists suggests that increasing radiation from
the sun is responsible for recent global climate changes.

Dr Sami Solanki, the director of the renowned Max Planck Institute for Solar
System Research in Gottingen, Germany, who led the research, said: "The Sun
has been at its strongest over the past 60 years and may now be affecting
global temperatures.

"The Sun is in a changed state. It is brighter than it was a few hundred years
ago and this brightening started relatively recently - in the last 100 to 150
years."

Dr Solanki said that the brighter Sun and higher levels of "greenhouse gases",
such as carbon dioxide, both contributed to the change in the Earth's
temperature but it was impossible to say which had the greater impact.

Average global temperatures have increased by about 0.2 deg Celsius over the
past 20 years and are widely believed to be responsible for new extremes in
weather patterns. After pressure from environmentalists, politicians agreed
the Kyoto Protocol in 1997, promising to limit greenhouse gas emissions
between 2008 and 2012. Britain ratified the protocol in 2002 and said it would
cut emissions by 12.5 per cent from 1990 levels.

Globally, 1997, 1998 and 2002 were the hottest years since worldwide weather
records were first collated in 1860.

Most scientists agree that greenhouse gases from fossil fuels have contributed
to the warming of the planet in the past few decades but have questioned
whether a brighter Sun is also responsible for rising temperatures.

To determine the Sun's role in global warming, Dr Solanki's research team
measured magnetic zones on the Sun's surface known as sunspots, which are
believed to intensify the Sun's energy output.

The team studied sunspot data going back several hundred years. They found
that a dearth of sunspots signalled a cold period - which could last up to 50
years - but that over the past century their numbers had increased as the
Earth's climate grew steadily warmer. The scientists also compared data from
ice samples collected during an expedition to Greenland in 1991. The most
recent samples contained the lowest recorded levels of beryllium 10 for more
than 1,000 years. Beryllium 10 is a particle created by cosmic rays that
decreases in the Earth's atmosphere as the magnetic energy from the Sun
increases. Scientists can currently trace beryllium 10 levels back 1,150
years.

Dr Solanki does not know what is causing the Sun to burn brighter now or how
long this cycle would last.

He says that the increased solar brightness over the past 20 years has not
been enough to cause the observed climate changes but believes that the impact
of more intense sunshine on the ozone layer and on cloud cover could be
affecting the climate more than the sunlight itself.

Dr Bill Burrows, a climatologist and a member of the Royal Meteorological
Society, welcomed Dr Solanki's research. "While the established view remains
that the sun cannot be responsible for all the climate changes we have seen in
the past 50 years or so, this study is certainly significant," he said.

"It shows that there is enough happening on the solar front to merit further
research. Perhaps we are devoting too many resources to correcting human
effects on the climate without being sure that we are the major contributor."

Dr David Viner, the senior research scientist at the University of East
Anglia's climatic research unit, said the research showed that the sun did
have an effect on global warming.

He added, however, that the study also showed that over the past 20 years the
number of sunspots had remained roughly constant, while the Earth's
temperature had continued to increase.

This suggested that over the past 20 years, human activities such as the
burning of fossil fuels and deforestation had begun to dominate "the natural
factors involved in climate change", he said.

Dr Gareth Jones, a climate researcher at the Met Office, said that Dr
Solanki's findings were inconclusive because the study had not incorporated
other potential climate change factors.

"The Sun's radiance may well have an impact on climate change but it needs to
be looked at in conjunction with other factors such as greenhouse gases,
sulphate aerosols and volcano activity," he said. The research adds weight to
the views of David Bellamy, the conservationist. "Global warming - at least
the modern nightmare version - is a myth," he said. "I am sure of it and so
are a growing number of scientists. But what is really worrying is that the
world's politicians and policy-makers are not.

"Instead, they have an unshakeable faith in what has, unfortunately, become
one of the central credos of the environmental movement: humans burn fossil
fuels, which release increased levels of carbon dioxide - the principal so-
called greenhouse gas - into the atmosphere, causing the atmosphere to heat
up. They say this is global warming: I say this is poppycock."

## Science News

External Links

  * ### Max Planck institute for solar system research

  * ### Global Warming Information Page

  * ### Kyoto protocol

In Science News

![A combination photograph shows the beginning \(top L\) to the end \(top L to

bottom R\) of a total solar eclipse as seen from the beach of Ternate island,

Indonesia](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03591/eclipse-

main-summ__3591538g.jpg)

### Total eclipse, in pictures

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03586/scott-

summ_3586802g.jpg)

### Scott Kelly returns to Earth

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03561/summ_Research_in_t_3561837g.jpg)

### The remote economy of the Svalbard archipelago

![An astonishing image of a pregnant pony uterus has been selected as the

overall winner for the 2015 Wellcome Image Awards. The photograph was taken by

Michael Frank, and is of an historic specimen from the Lanyon Anatomy Museum

of the Royal Veterinary College in London. It shows the preserved uterus of a

New Forest pony, approximately five months into the

pregnancy](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03237/summ-

winninng-well_3237807g.jpg)

### Wellcome Image Awards

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03211/space-

summ_3211543g.jpg)

### The first space 'selfie'

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03189/sir-

David_3189923g.jpg)

### Named after Sir David

![Space selfie by European Space Agency astronaut Alexander

Gerst](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03069/POTD-Space-

selfie_3069136g.jpg)

### Pictures of the year- part 4

Top news galleries

Advertisement

![](http://pagead2.googlesyndication.com/pagead/imp.gif?client=ca-

telegraph_uk_420x200&event=noscript)

Telegraph on Facebook

Advertisement

Latest Video»

![Rat climbs over

man](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/Rat_climbs_over_ma_3602877g.jpg)

### Large rat climbs on sleeping commuter

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/grandad_3602577g.jpg)

### Disabled great-grandfather denied stairlift and forced to crawl

![Old and frail wombat is

rescued](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03602/Wombat-1-e_3602888g.jpg)

### Elderly wombat rescued after being attacked

![Scientist in lab

](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03549/scientist-in-

lab_3549159g.jpg)

Sponsored

### When media meets medicine

More from the web

Advertisement

Advertisement

More from the web

Loading

More from The Telegraph

Loading

News

![Progress 17 supply vehicle departs from the International Space

Station](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03285/Progress_17__3285797f.jpg)

### The latest news, opinion and analysis

View

Football

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03101/old-

trafford_3101399f.jpg)

### Catch up on all the latest football news and results

View

Film

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03208/oscars-

summary-2_3208754f.jpg)

### All the latest film trailers, reviews and features

View

Competitions

![](https://secure.i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/03614/Malta-

TD_3614608f.jpg)

### Enter one of our exciting new competitions

View

Back to top

  * HOME
  * News
  * UK News
  * Politics

  * Long Reads

  * Wikileaks

  * Jobs

  * World News

  * Europe
  * USA
  * China

  * Royal Family News

  * Celebrity news

  * Dating

  * Finance

  * Education
  * Defence

  * Weird News

  * Editor's Choice

  * Financial Services

  * Pictures

  * Video
  * Matt
  * Alex

  * Comment

  * Blogs

  * Crossword

  * Contact us

  * Privacy and Cookies
  * Advertising
  * Fantasy Football

  * Tickets

  * Announcements

  * Reader Prints
  *   * Follow Us

  * Apps
  * Epaper
  * Expat

  * Promotions

  * Subscriber
  * Syndication

(C) Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2019

Terms and Conditions

Today's News

Archive

Style Book

Weather Forecast

![](//secure-uk.imrworldwide.com/cgi-

bin/m?ci=uk-101665h&cg=0&cc=1&ts=noscript)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

