

Asset 5arrow-downarrow-leftarrow-rightarrow-uparticleAsset 31Asset 2Asset
7Asset 6Asset 7Asset 15Asset 16cartAsset 51cart-filledAsset 52checkAsset
50Asset 3chevron-upchevron-leftchevron-rightchevron-upclosecomment-newcomment-
filledAsset 11double-caret-downdouble-chevron-downAsset 55double-chevron-
upAsset 56email-newemail-filledAsset 14Asset 2fullscreen-closefullscreen-
opengallerygallery-filledAsset 15GlobegridAsset 17grid-filledAsset
18headphones-newheadphones-filledAsset 19heart-filledheart-
openinteractiveAsset 73linkAsset 48loadingAsset 45Artboard 1minusmutedAsset
29muted-filledAsset 30ng-borderAsset 8pauseAsset 40pause-filledAsset 39Asset
12Asset 13playAsset 33play-filledAsset
32plusNG_AD_Iconography_111317_JY_v2Asset 3replayAsset 11Asset 10Asset
4SearchIconshareAsset 34facebookgithubArtboard 1Artboard
1linkedinlinkedin_inpinterestpinterest_psnapchatsnapchat_2twitterwhatsappspeakerAsset
27speaker-filledAsset 28star-filledstar-opentextAsset 43text-filledAsset
42tiltAsset 58Asset 8Asset 9Asset 4userAsset 53user-filledvideo-cameraAsset
35video-camera-filledAsset 36volumeAsset 25volume-filledAsset 26

![](/etc/designs/platform/v2/images/logos/ng-black-

logo.ngsversion.5ce5f96b.png)
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/habitats/rainforest-
threats.html

(C) 1996-2015 National Geographic Society, (C) 2015- 2019 National Geographic
Partners, LLC. All rights reserved

* * *

Photograph by Joel Sartore

Read Caption

Clear-cut swaths of the Amazon rain forest in Quiandeua, Brazil, are often
planted with manioc, or cassava, a shrub grown for its starchy root. Farmers
slash-and-burn large parcels of forest every year to create grazing and crop
lands, but the forest's nutrient-poor soil often renders the land ill-suited
for agriculture, and within a year or two, the farmers move on.

Photograph by Joel Sartore

Reference

# Rain Forest Threats

## Learn about what threatens the wet, layered forest and what you can do to

help.

1 Minute Read

* * *

* * *

More than half of Earth’s rain forests have already been lost due to the human
demand for wood and arable land. Rain forests that once grew over 14 percent
of the land on Earth now cover only about 6 percent. And if current
deforestation rates continue, these critical habitats could disappear from the
planet completely within the next hundred years.

The reasons for plundering rain forests are mainly economic. Wealthy nations
drive demand for tropical timber, and cash-strapped governments often grant
logging concessions at a fraction of the land’s true value. “Homesteader”
policies also encourage citizens to clear-cut forests for farms. Sustainable
logging and harvesting rather than clear-cutting are among the strategies key
to halting rain forest loss.

## **Threats**

  * Logging interests cut down rain forest trees for timber used in flooring, furniture, and other items.
  * Power plants and other industries cut and burn trees to generate electricity.
  * The paper industry turns huge tracts of rain forest trees into pulp.
  * The cattle industry uses slash-and-burn techniques to clear ranch land.
  * Agricultural interests, particularly the soy industry, clear forests for cropland.
  * Subsistence farmers slash-and-burn rain forest for firewood and to make room for crops and grazing lands.
  * Mining operations clear forest to build roads and dig mines.
  * Governments and industry clear-cut forests to make way for service and transit roads.
  * Hydroelectric projects flood acres of rain forest.

## **Solutions**

Campaigns that educate people about the destruction caused by rain forest
timber and encourage purchasing of sustainable rain forest products could
drive demand down enough to slow deforestation, and these practices in
particular could save millions of acres of rain forest every year.

  * Sustainable-logging regimes that selectively cull trees rather than clear-cut them
  * Encouraging people who live near rain forests to harvest its bounty (nuts, fruits, medicines) rather than clear-cutting it for farmland
  * Government moratoriums on road building and large infrastructure projects in the rain forest 

Continue Reading

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

