

Skip to navigation - Site map

# European journal of American studies

  * en
  * fr

Home > Issues > 9-1 > **The Ideology of Climate Change De...**

  * ![Logo European Association for American Studies](docannexe/image/11998/logo-eaas-small120.png)

Search

Contents - Previous document

9-1 | 2014 : Spring 2014

5

# The Ideology of Climate Change Denial in the United States

**Jean-Daniel Collomb**

Abstract | Index | Outline | Text | Bibliography | Notes | References | About
the author

## Abstract

The concerted effort to discredit the scientific consensus over man-made
global warming has been continuing for two decades in the United States, and
shows no sign of weakening. It is very often described as an attempt on the
part of corporate America, most notably the fossil fuel industries, to hinder
governmental regulations on their activities. While emphasising this dimension
of the US climate denial movement, this article also aims to show the
complexity of the movement, rather than the mere defence of the narrowly-
defined and short-term economic interests of the oil and gas industries, by
shedding light on two additional factors which have been instrumental in
blocking strong climate action. First, climate denial stems from the strong
ideological commitment of small-government conservatives and libertarians to
_laisser-faire_ and their strong opposition to regulation. Second, in order to
disarm their opponents, US climate deniers often rest their case on the
defence of the American way of life, defined by high consumption and ever-
expanding material prosperity. It is the contention of this article,
therefore, that the US climate denial movement is best understood as a
combination of these three trends.

Top of page

## Index terms

### Keywords :

climate change, conservatism, consumerism, ecology, environmentalism, free
market, global warming, ideology, libertarianism, Republican party, think
tanks.

### Cited Names :

Dick Armey, Glenn Beck, George W. Bush, Robert Byrd, J. Baird Callicott,
Michael Crichton, Rahm Emanuel, Jerry Falwell, Ari Fleischer, Newt Gingrich,
Barry Goldwater, Al Gore, Chuck Hagel, Jon Huntsman, James Inhofe, Jack Kemp,
Matt Kibbe, Charles Krauthammer, Rush Limbaugh, Richard Lugar, Joe Manchin,
Michael E. Mann, John McCain, Bill McKibben, Patrick J. Michaels, Steve
Milloy, Barack Obama, Gifford Pinchot, Pat Robertson, Mitt Romney, Theodore
Roosevelt, Fred Singer, Olympia Snowe, George F. Will

Top of page

## Outline

  1. BACKGROUND 

  2. A CASE OF LEGAL BRIBERY

  3. A MATTER OF IDEOLOGICAL SURVIVAL

  4. THE AMERICAN WAY OF LIFE OR THE LAST REFUGE OF A CLIMATE CHANGE DENIER

  5. CONCLUSION

Top of page

## Full text

PDF Send by e-mail

  * 1 Claude Allègre, _L’imposture climatique ou la fausse écologie_ (Paris: Plon, 2010). Vincent Courtill (...)
  * 2 The lobbying activities of the Koch brother (Charles G. Koch and David H. Koch) who own Koch Indus (...)
  * 3 Among the most prominent think tanks involved in the climate change denial movement are the Americ (...)

1 The ideological underpinning of climate change denial in the United States
merits closer scrutiny than it has received to date. American opponents and
critics of the scientific consensus over man-made global warming have been
much more vocal and influential than their counterparts in continental Europe;
in France several scientists and intellectuals1 do take issue with the
positions of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) but they
tend to be rather isolated and marginal figures with little or no impact on
public policy. By contrast, American climate change deniers have been
remarkably successful in confusing public opinion and delaying decisive
action. They receive considerable media attention and enjoy access to key
Washington power brokers. Therefore, it is worth analyzing the origins of this
powerful movement in order to see what really drives climate change denial in
the United States. It is very often claimed, with good reason, that climate
sceptics are beholden to powerful corporate interests such as those of the
Koch brothers.2 Ties between corporations and conservative and libertarian
think tanks3 have been well-documented. There is no denying that, in the short
term, some industries, such as the coal industry, have a vested interest in
averting any government plan to reduce carbon emissions.

  * 4 James A. Stimson, _Tides of Consent: How Public Opinion Shapes American Politics_ (Cambridge, UK; New (...)

2 It is my contention that the emphasis placed on the efforts of the fossil
fuel industries to promote their short-term economic self-interests should be
complemented by other important factors. First, there is an ideological
dimension to the effort to counter climate action: the conservative movement
appears to be committed to small government and free enterprise as ideological
ends in themselves, irrespective of economic and environmental common sense.
From the small-government perspective, therefore, discrediting calls for
strong national and international climate action has become a matter of
ideological survival. Second, another factor complicates the matter even
further for Bill McKibben, Al Gore, and their followers: the defence of the
American way of life defined as the dedication to permanently expanding
economic prosperity and consumption has now become a highly convenient line of
attack for climate change deniers. The American way of life is clearly an
ideology all the more potent because it is not recognized as such by most
Americans. In fact, enjoying a clean environment is high on the average
voter’s wish list.4 Embracing high environmental standards out of principle is
one thing, however, accepting subsequent far-reaching and significant
lifestyle changes in the form of higher gas prices or reduced mobility, for
instance, is quite another, a fact acknowledged by both climate change deniers
and the Obama administration.

# 1. BACKGROUND

  * 5 Craig W. Allin, _The Politics of Wilderness Preservation_ (Fairbanks, AK: The University of Alaska Pr (...)
  * 6 Robert Gottlieb, _Forcing the Spring: The Transformation of the American Environmental Movement_ (Wa (...)
  * 7 See the EPA website for the complete text of the Clean Air Act: http://www.epa.gov/air/caa, last u (...)
  * 8 See the EPA website for the complete text of the Clean Water Act: http://www.epa.gov/lawsregs/laws (...)
  * 9 See the website of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for the complete text of th (...)
  * 10 See the EPA website for a summary of the history of the EPA: http://www2.epa.gov/aboutepa/epa-hist (...)
  * 11 It is noteworthy that the land management policies sought by the Cato Institute and the Heritage F (...)

3 The conservation of natural resources as a federal prerogative emerged
during the Progressive era under the presidency of Theodore Roosevelt
(1901-1909): the US Reclamation Service (1902) and the US Forest Service
(1905) became a blueprint for the creation of countless federal conservation
agencies throughout the 20th century. The Forest Service, under the mindful
direction of Gifford Pinchot, was given the mandate of managing the forest
reserves, later renamed national forests, which had been set aside in the
early 1890s. These developments constituted a major watershed in the role of
the federal government in the management of the public domain. Hitherto,
public officials had been eager to privatize the federally held lands as
quickly as possible so that various special interest groups could improve and
develop the land as they saw fit. Environmental destruction and waste on a
large scale had convinced Theodore Roosevelt that the federal government
needed to take an active role in managing natural resources.5 If the origins
of American conservation date to the late 19th century, the modern
environmental movement arose in the late 1960s and early 1970s when American
environmentalists ceased to devote all of their attention and efforts to
wilderness preservation and began to address quality-of-life issues.6 A flurry
of environmental laws such as the Clean Air Act (1963),7 the Clean Water Act
(1972),8 the Endangered Species Act (1973),9 the proclamation of an annual
Earth Day (1970), as well as the creation of the Environmental Protection
Agency (1972)10 to serve as a long awaited federal environmental watchdog, all
bear witness to the public’s growing environmental awareness at the time. Most
recently, concerns raised by the scientific community about the issue of
global warming have led strong environmentalists such as Bill McKibben and Al
Gore to seek new legislation to curtail its negative impacts on the planet.
Meanwhile some conservatives such as James Inhofe and Joe Barton have been
doing their utmost to counter the myriad of environmental regulations and
safety standards passed by Congress during the 1960s and 1970s and future
environmental legislation.11

# 2. A CASE OF LEGAL BRIBERY

  * 12 Chris Mooney, _The Republican War on Science_ (New York: Basic Books, 2006), 30-32.
  * 13 Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway, _Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Tru_ (...)
  * 14 Ibid., 169-215.

4 In the 1970s eager to protect its activities from regulations and above all
its profit margins, corporate America began to challenge the growing influence
of environmental organizations and other advocacy groups who had been
instrumental in ushering in this golden age of environmental legislation.12
Corporate leaders drew their inspiration from the successful tactics of the
tobacco industry to thwart any restrictions on their activities: Naomi Oreskes
and Erik M. Conway use the term “tobacco strategy” to explain how corporations
set up or fund seemingly independent think tanks and hire experts and
scientists in order to discredit scientific research and evidence likely to
justify governmental regulations on their activities.13 Needlessly to say,
this constitutes a complete perversion of the scientific process, as the goal
results in the fact that no scientifically-based call for environmental or
safety regulations go unanswered and doubt is cast on the consensus reached in
peer-reviewed scientific research. The climate change denial movement is part
and parcel of this larger corporate effort to hinder regulations.14

5 Since the 1990s critics of climate scepticism have been striving to draw the
public’s attention to the seamy side of the movement: its incestuous
connection with the fossil fuel industries whose overriding objective is, they
claim, to forestall government action by confusing public perceptions of the
scientific evidence at hand. In _The Assault on Reason_ (2007) former Vice-
President Al Gore accused powerful corporations like Exxon Mobil of being
determined to skew and pervert the scientific process:

>   * 15 Al Gore, _The Assault on Reason_ (London: Bloomsbury, 2007), Kindle
edition, 199.

>

>

> Wealthy right-wing ideologues have joined with the most cynical and
irresponsible companies in the oil, coal, and mining industries to contribute
large sums of money to finance pseudoscientific front groups that specialize
in sowing confusion in the public’s mind about global warming. They issue one
misleading ‘report’ after another, pretending that there is a significant
disagreement in the legitimate scientific community in areas where there is
actually a broad-based consensus.15

  * 16 Al Gore, “Climate of Denial,” _Rolling Stone_ , June 22, 2011, accessed April 30, 2013, http://www.ro (...)
  * 17 Mann has been the unfortunate target of vicious _ad hominem_ attacks by climate change deniers who fa (...)
  * 18 Michael E. Mann, _The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars: Dispatches from the Front Lines_ (New York: (...)

6Gore reiterated his critique in even harsher terms four years later in an
article in _Rolling Stone_ castigating the Senate for being “controlled lock,
stock and barrel by the oil and coal industries,” making any hope of climate
action a distant prospect.16 More recently Gore’s assessment has been echoed
by the climate scientist Michael E. Mann17 whose book _The Hockey Stick and
the Climate Wars_ questions the scientific integrity of Patrick J. Michaels
and Fred Singer, two of the leading experts who attack the theory of man-made
global warming: Mann points to the funds Michaels and Singer allegedly
received from the energy sector.18

  * 19 Cap and trade is defined as a market-based plan to reduce carbon emissions in which the government (...)
  * 20 “Oil and Gas: Lobbying, 2012,” Center for Responsive Politics, accessed May 2, 2013, http://www.op (...)
  * 21 Eric Pooley, _The Climate Wars: True Believers, Power Brokers, and the Fight to Save the Earth_ (New (...)
  * 22 “Influence and Lobbying: Oil and Gas,” Center for Responsive Politics, accessed May 2, 2013, http: (...)
  * 23 “Oil and Gas Lobbying, 2012.”
  * 24 “Environment: Lobbying, 2012,” Center for Responsive Politics, accessed May 2, 2013, http://www.op (...)
  * 25 Peter J. Jacques, Riley E. Dunlap and Mark Freeman, “The Organization of Denial: Conservative Thin (...)

7 Allegations of corporate manoeuvres in an attempt to weaken environmental
regulations are documented in the data collected by the Center for Responsive
Politics. A peak in campaign contributions from the energy sector occurred in
2009 as Congress was considering passing a cap-and-trade19 bill which would
have been a crucial and long-awaited first step towards an American commitment
to serious climate action.20 The American Coalition for Clean Coal Electricity
(ACCCE), a well-heeled advocacy group representing coal producers, among
others, invested massively in the 2008 presidential election.21 Four years
later, Republicans received a significantly larger amount of money from the
fossil fuel industries than their Democratic colleagues: Barack Obama received
$710,277 in 2011-2012 while Mitt Romney’s campaign pocketed $4,763,934 during
the same period.22 Needless to say, the contest between those industries and
environmental organizations is uneven: in 2011, it is estimated that all oil
and gas interests invested $149,169,677 in lobbying23 whilst overall
contributions from US environmental organisations amounted to $18,125,119.24
It is also worth noting that fossil fuel money does not just go to elected
officials and candidates. Oil and gas companies have been contributing lavish
sums of money to conservative and libertarian think tanks for several decades
with the two-fold goal of ensuring not only that elected officials and public
figures remain sympathetic to the interests of the fossil fuel industries, but
that they are provided with the expertise and the scientific evidence they
need to be able to counter arguments by the proponents of environmental
regulations as well. Hence, the conservative Washington think tanks such as
the Competitive Enterprise Institute and the Heritage Foundation are among the
biggest recipients of oil and gas money. Peter J. Jacques, Riley E. Dunlap,
and Mark Freeman have also demonstrated that corporate interests are funding
indirectly anti-environmental expertise by bankrolling conservative think
tanks: of 141 environmentally-sceptic books written between 1972 and 2005,
only 11 were not linked to corporate-funded conservative think tanks.25 It is
therefore undeniable that the climate change denial movement stems from a
concerted effort on the part of fossil fuel industries to protect their
economic self-interests from government regulation. Yet there appears to be
more to the climate change denial movement than the mere defence of economic
self-interest.

# 3. A MATTER OF IDEOLOGICAL SURVIVAL

  * 26 Nick Wing, “John Shimkus, GOP Rep. Who Denies Climate Change on Religious Grounds, Could Lead Hous (...)

8 The climate change denial movement in the United States attracts small-
government advocates as well as social conservatives and members of the so-
called religious Right. The latter have assumed centre stage since the early
1980s, focusing on issues of morality: they have been instrumental in bringing
about the so-called culture wars through their positions on a wide range of
issues—abortion, same-sex marriage and, more recently, stem cell research.
Although conservative activists sometimes find common ground among themselves,
social conservatives ought not to be confused with their fiscal counterparts,
also known as small-government conservatives, nor with libertarians whose main
political aim is to reduce drastically the size and prominence of the federal
government and give business a free rein. A few notable exceptions
notwithstanding,26 the effort to question the validity of the theory of man-
made global warming has been spearheaded largely by the admirers of Barry
Goldwater and Jack Kemp rather than the disciples of Jerry Falwell and Pat
Robertson. The Heartland Institute, the Heritage Foundation and the Cato
Institute, all conservative and libertarian think tanks, have also joined the
fray in addition to the well-funded advocacy groups Americans for Prosperity
and Americans for Tax Reform. Such a broad range of organizations suggests
that the climate war is part of the larger campaign launched by fiscal
conservatives in the 1970s to counter the environmental movement’s agenda.

  * 27 Julie Borowski, “Earth Day Special: Private Property Protects the Environment,” Freedom Works, Apr (...)
  * 28 Jay Wesley Richards, “The Economy Hits Home: Energy and the Environment” (Washington: The Heritage (...)

9 Small-government advocates usually declare that they value the health of the
land and support high environmental standards. They claim to disagree with the
environmental community on the means, but not on the ends. They argue, in a
counter-intuitive way, that the best way to protect the environment is by
maximizing economic freedom and eliminating government. This can be achieved,
they suggest, by the consolidation of private property rights which will
foster good stewardship since private land owners have more incentives than do
government bureaucrats to take care of the land they own.27 Jay Wesley
Richards of the Heritage Foundation asserts that “sometimes environmental
regulation is in order, but more often than not, there are market-based
solutions that work better. For instance, strong private property laws are
often the best ways to encourage people to act in environmentally friendly
ways. We tend to act less responsibly when we are not directly affected by our
actions.”28

  * 29 Kate Zernike, _Boiling Mad: Inside Tea Party America_ (New York: Times Books, 2010), 37.
  * 30 Dick Armey and Matt Kibbe, _Give Us Liberty: A Tea Party Manifesto_ (New York: Harper Collins, 2010) (...)
  * 31 Ibid., 95-96.

10 Far from being a means to an end and a way to achieve the good society, the
conservative movement’s commitment to small government and free markets seems
to have become an end in itself and almost a secular religion. Over the last
few years, no social movement has epitomized this attitude better than the Tea
Parties, who came into being in the wake of the financial meltdown in 2008. It
is undeniable that economic issues are much more central to Tea Party activism
than social ones.29 In their Tea Party manifesto Dick Armey and Matt Kibbe
express their aversion to government regulations in no uncertain terms: “For
us, it is all about the rights of the individual over the collective.”30 The
Tea Party movement’s discourse is in keeping with the long-standing American
tradition of anti-government rhetoric going back all the way to the Anti-
Federalists. It is no wonder that cap and trade quickly became one of their
_bêtes noires_. Armey and Kibbe blasted this climate bill as a sly attempt on
the part of the President and his party to “‘Europeanize’ the United
States.”31 They give short shrift to the scientific consensus on man-made
climate change because the notion that the federal government ought to step in
so as to avert an environmental Armageddon threatens to undermine the entire
intellectual edifice of the Tea Party movement. In order to grasp the stakes
of the climate war, it is useful to consider the words of the prominent
environmental philosopher J. Baird Callicott:

>   * 32 J. Baird Callicott, “From the Land Ethic to the Earth Ethic: Aldo
Leopold and the Gaia Hypothesis, (...)

>

>

> It will not suffice … simply to encourage people _individually and
voluntarily_ to build green and drive hybrid. But what’s worse is the
implication that that’s all we can do about it, that the ultimate
responsibility for dampening the adverse effects of global climate change
devolves to each of us as individuals. On the contrary, the only hope we have
to temper global climate change is a collective sociocultural response in the
form of policy, regulation, treaty, and law.32

11The contrast between Dick Armey’s rabid fear of government and Callicott’s
insistence on the need for a government-sponsored international concerted
effort could not be starker.

  * 33 Oreskes and Conway, _Merchants_ , 238.
  * 34 See the website of the United States Climate Action Partnership, http://www.us-cap.org/.

12 Global warming poses a philosophical challenge to libertarians and small-
government conservatives: their world view is premised on the idea that
government power should always be held in check lest it destroy individual
freedom while the world is faced with a crisis of global proportions that
could only be averted by a strong and prolonged government action. The steps
necessary to address the challenges posed by global warming would lay waste to
the Tea Party’s ironclad faith in the free market as the ultimate problem-
solver. As Naomi Oreskes states: “Accepting that by-products of industrial
civilization were irreparably damaging the global environment was to accept
the reality of market failure. It was to acknowledge the limits of free-market
capitalism.”33 Given such circumstances, denial appears to be a more desirable
strategy than a devastating reappraisal of one’s deeply held beliefs. In that
regard, the climate denial movement clearly emerges as a case of ideological
grandstanding. As a matter of fact, a significant number of American
corporations, by definition dedicated to free-market economics, have already
jumped on the global warming bandwagon. The US Climate Action Partnership, set
up by several major corporations in cooperation with various environmental
organisations in 2007, is a case in point.34 What is at stake are the
intellectual underpinnings of libertarianism and small-government
conservatism. Their most zealous proponents are not prepared to surrender
without putting up a fight.

  * 35 Michael Gerson, “Climate Change and the Culture War,” _The Washington Post_ , January 17, 2012, acces (...)
  * 36 Michael Crichton, _State of Fear_ (New York: Harper Collins, 2009).
  * 37 Michael Crichton, “The Role of Science in Environmental Policy-Making,” US Senate Committee on Env (...)

13 Michael Gerson, _Washington Post_ columnist and former speechwriter for
President George W. Bush, has pointed out that the political controversy over
man-made global warming is the most recent front in the so-called culture
wars.35 Whether correct or not, Gerson’s idea bears testimony to the vehement
rhetoric deployed by climate change deniers against their detractors, and vice
versa. The climate change denial movement sometimes appears as the extension
of Cold War politics by other means. Deniers are prone to dismiss the theory
of man-made global warming and all the attendant government schemes to
mitigate it as a kind of socialist conspiracy hatched by the enemies of
economic freedom. Michael Crichton’s novel _State of Fear_ is a good example
as it casts global warming as a ploy to impose strong government intervention
on the American people and suppress free enterprise.36 Oklahoma Senator James
Inhofe, the most vocal climate change denier in the Upper House, asked
Crichton to testify before the US Senate Committee on Environment and Public
Works in 2005.37 The idea of a statist conspiracy to stifle entrepreneurship
combined with dire warnings about “environmental socialism” also resonates
with the guests and anchors of right-wing talk shows like Rush Limbaugh’s and
Glenn Beck’s.

  * 38 George F. Will, “Global Warming Advocates Ignore the Boulders,” _The Washington Post_ , February 21, (...)
  * 39 Steve Milloy, _Green Hell: How Environmentalists Plan to Control your Life and What You Can Do to St_ (...)
  * 40 Charles Krauthammer, “Carbon Chastity,” _The Washington Post_ , May 30, 2008, accessed April 30, 2013, (...)

14 This being said, climate denial is not confined to popular culture: it has
also been advocated by prominent conservative intellectuals. George F. Will,
in a 2010 _Washington Post_ column, derided the threat of global warming as a
convenient strategy used by big-government liberals like Al Gore and Barack
Obama to reinforce what he perceives as the pre-eminence of statism in
American life and to drive the last nail in the coffin of economic freedom. He
characterises public figures endeavouring to draw the public’s attention to
the dangers posed by the warming of the planet as “those trying to stampede
the world into a spasm of prophylactic statism.”38 The fear of socialism by
stealth, which has been on the conservative fiscal agenda since the end of the
Cold War, has been summarized laconically by the conservative lobbyist and
zealous climate change denier Steve Milloy: “green is the new red.”39 In a
more restrained manner, the influential conservative intellectual Charles
Krauthammer offered a variation on the same theme in a 2008 _Washington Post_
article: although he was careful to describe himself as a “global warming
agnostic,” he was quick to cast suspicions on the motives behind the effort to
avert climate change: “Just as the ash heap of history beckoned, the
intellectual left was handed the ultimate salvation: environmentalism. Now the
experts will regulate your life not in the name of the proletariat or Fabian
socialism but—even better—in the name of Earth itself.”40 The fact that such
prominent figures as George F. Will and Charles Krauthammer should have
towed—albeit tentatively in Krauthammer’s case—the climate change denial line
serves to suggest that this concerted effort cannot be dismissed as a fringe
phenomenon.

  * 41 Neela Barnejee, “Mitt Romney Worked to Combat Climate Change as Governor,” _The Los_
  * 42 Mitt Romney, _No Apology: Believe in America_ (New York: Saint Martin’s Griffin, 2010), 243.

15 Climate change deniers have been remarkably successful in shaping the
position of the Republican Party with regards to global warming. During the
2012 presidential primary contest, each candidate had to pass a number of
ideological litmus tests in order to prove his or her conservativeness on key
issues like illegal immigration, abortion, and same-sex marriage. Curiously,
denying man-made global warming or downplaying its consequences turned out to
be one of the requirements foisted on the candidates. Mitt Romney, who
eventually became the Republican nominee, remains a case in point. Neela
Barnjee, reporter for the _Los Angeles Times_ , has shown that, although
Romney had been pro-active on climate policy at the beginning of his term as
Governor of Massachusetts (2003-2007), he had no compunction about changing
his position when he first decided to run for president in 2008.41 To take but
one example, in 2005 he distanced himself from a regional compact known as the
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (ReGGIe) created by New England states with
a view to reducing carbon emissions in the region, a move all the more
noteworthy as Romney had been instrumental in its initial development. Romney
does not deny in his 2010 book _No Apology_ that the Earth is warming but he
claims to be uncertain about the extent of human responsibility in the warming
and discards cap-and-trade legislation as a set of “feel-good policies” which
will fail to make a difference, thereby echoing a theme already well-rehearsed
in conservative and libertarian circles.42 Did Romney genuinely change his
mind on the substantive matters involved in this issue or, is it more likely
that his sudden change of heart reflects the difficulty of being an advocate
of serious climate action inside the Republican Party? Once again, the climate
controversy is just one arena of contention in the multifaceted effort to
protect American corporations and business owners from government regulations.

  * 43 Ronald Brownstein, _The Second Civil War: How Extreme Partisanship Has Paralyzed_

16 Ronald Brownstein has noted over the last few decades, and especially since
the triumph of Newt Gingrich’s Contract with America in 1994, that the
Republican Party has become significantly more conservative and more
ideologically homogeneous and therefore is less liable to strike compromises
than in the decades that followed World War II.43 The growing emphasis on
ideological purity in Republican primaries and among activists has made it
possible for climate change deniers to wield a disproportionate influence
within a party which routinely represents about half of the electorate.
Meanwhile, moderate and middle-of-the-road Republicans willing to embrace
necessary and desirable regulations on business activities are being sidelined
as exemplified by Senator Richard Lugar’s downfall in an Indiana primary after
a 30-year term in the Upper House of Congress. Ideological intransigence also
prompted Maine Senator Olympia Snowe to not seek a fourth term in 2012. John
McCain, who unavailingly had co-sponsored several climate bills in the Senate
before winning the Republican presidential nomination in 2008, did not even
mention global warming in his acceptance speech at the Republican Convention
in Saint Paul, Minnesota. The rub for the Republican Party is that although
market fundamentalism may play well during some Republican primaries across
the country, it is unlikely to be a winner with the larger electorate in the
general elections, which Mitt Romney found out in 2012. What may be more
appealing to the general public, however, is the opposition to climate
legislation in defence of the so-called American way of life.

# 4. THE AMERICAN WAY OF LIFE OR THE LAST REFUGE OF A CLIMATE CHANGE DENIER

  * 44 Naomi Oreskes, “Beyond the Ivory Tower: The Scientific Consensus on Climate Change,” _Science_ 306 ( (...)
  * 45 James Hoggan, _Climate Cover-Up: The Crusade to Deny Global Warming_ (Vancouver: Greystone Books, 200 (...)
  * 46 Kenneth P. Green, “Not Going Away: America’s Energy Security, Jobs and Climate Challenges,” Stateme (...)
  * 47 Indur Goklany, “What to Do About Climate Change,” _Cato Institute Policy Analysis_ 609 (February 2008 (...)

17 The effort to undermine the credibility of scientific research on man-made
global warming has continued since the early 1990s after the IPCC had started
calling the alarm. Nevertheless because of mounting scientific evidence44 it
is becoming increasingly untenable to deny reality, which has led conservative
and libertarian think tanks to modify their tactics. Increasingly, to
paraphrase James Hoggan, “nondenier deniers” are replacing “deniers”. These
nondenier deniers are “people who put themselves forth as reasonable
interpreters of the science, even as allies in the fight to bring climate
change to the public’s attention. But then they throw in a variety of
arguments that actually undermine the public appetite for action.”45
Libertarian and conservative climate experts increasingly recoil from denying
the fact that the planet is warming, but they usually lose no time in
qualifying their acceptance with two caveats. First, they assert that the
negative repercussions of a global rise in temperatures are being grossly
overstated in order to alarm the public and decision-makers into accepting the
environmentalist agenda. Second, nondenier deniers argue that actions to
mitigate the effects of global warming will be economically destructive and
environmentally insignificant. Consider the testimony of Kenneth P. Green of
the American Enterprise Institute before the House Select Committee on Energy
Independence and Global Warming in December 2010: “It is time policymakers
recognize that despite the claims of renewable energy and efficiency
hucksters, we do not have the technologies needed to significantly curb
greenhouse gas emissions without causing massive economic disruption.”46 Green
goes on to demand additional deregulation so that the American people will
face fewer obstacles as they adapt to the consequences of climate change. The
commitment to adaptation rather than mitigation has been repeated endlessly in
recent conservative and libertarian publications and statements on global
warming.47

  * 48 Sallie James, “A Harsh Climate for Trade: How Climate Change Proposals Threaten Global Commerce,” (...)
  * 49 Derrick Morgan, “A Carbon Tax Would Harm US Competitiveness and Low-Income Americans Without Helpi (...)
  * 50 Ibid., 5.
  * 51 Nicolas Loris and Brett D. Schaefer, “Climate Change: How the United States Should Lead,” The Herit (...)

18 **** There is no question that, taken in isolation, various points made by
climate change deniers are well taken and ought to be seriously heeded by the
proponents of strong climate action. Consider, for example, their repeated
claim that a unilateral approach to climate change by the American government
would make no real difference, an argument often used to discredit efforts by
Congress to impose mandatory reductions in greenhouse gas emissions across the
nation. Sallie James argues that cap and trade is a losing proposition because
it would have an insignificant impact on the earth’s temperatures while
damaging the competitiveness of the American economy.48Derrick Morgan raises
similar objections49 about a national putative carbon tax, also warning that
such a measure would blunt the benefits currently derived by the American
economy from the shale gas boom.50 Moreover, Nicolas Loris and Brett D.
Schaefer contend that placing the largest burden of reducing greenhouse gas
emissions on developed countries like the United States makes less and less
sense as developing countries, such as India or China, will soon overtake the
United States as the world’s chief emitters of carbon dioxide.51

  * 52 Steven Groves, “The ‘Kyoto II’ Climate Change Treaty: Implications for American Sovereignty,” The (...)

19 The fear that strong climate action might reduce American competitiveness
with rising giants like China is undoubtedly one of the strongest reasons why
the Senate refused to ratify the Kyoto Protocol in 1997. Senators Robert Byrd
(West Virginia) and Chuck Hagel (Nebraska) issued a resolution blocking the
ratification of the Kyoto protocol, invoking the same line of argument. In his
scathing indictment of the 2009 Copenhagen Climate Change Summit, Steven
Groves, of the Heritage Foundation, took exception to the fact that, under the
terms of a Kyoto II climate change treaty, the United States would be required
to help emerging economies, including China—its main economic rival, improve
their environmental standards by sharing American findings in clean energy
research.52 Groves reiterates his warning against American naiveté in climate
negotiations:

>   * 53 Steven Groves, “National Sovereignty May Melt at Climate Conference,”
The Heritage Foundation, Com (...)

>

>

> Developing nations, including economic giants such as India and China, view
climate change as a cash cow…and more. In addition to ‘milking’ developed
nations for hundreds of billions of dollars in aid, they’ll receive,
absolutely free, clean-energy technology worth untold billions more.53

  * 54 Derek Scissors, “China Will Follow the United States: A Climate Change Fable,” The Heritage Founda (...)
  * 55 Pooley, _Climate_ , 429-431.

20Earlier in 2009 Derek Scissors also dismissed the notion that China would
follow in the footsteps of the United States if only America took the lead, as
“a climate change fable.”54 Needless to say, the hard-hitting stance of the
Chinese delegation at the Copenhagen conference and their disrespectful
treatment of President Barack Obama55 appear to have corroborated the warnings
issued by the Heritage Foundation’s climate change experts. In the context of
the economic difficulties faced by the American economy since 2008 and in
light of the strong Chinese economy, it is at the very least problematic to
require the United States to engage in serious measures concerning climate
change action with no certainty that the Chinese will also be required to do
their fair share.

21 Of particular concern to climate sceptics has also been the defence of
American national sovereignty: they contend that an American commitment to a
multilateral approach to the climate crisis would inevitably lead to a major
loss of US autonomy. Steven Groves contends that under the terms of a Kyoto-
style treaty, the United States would be marginalised and exploited by other
nations:

>   * 56 Groves, “National Sovereignty”.

>

>

> A committee (or committees) of international experts—whose members may
include representatives from overtly hostile nations—will have the final word
on whether the US climate record is up to snuff. … Just as ‘developing world’
nations dominate other UN bodies such as the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council, so they will dominate the new international climate
bureaucracy and enforcement committees.56

  * 57 Steven Groves, “Why Does Sovereignty Matter to America?,” The Heritage Foundation, Understanding A (...)

22Steven Groves further argues the unconstitutionality of the ratification of
the Copenhagen treaty by the US Senate.57 Although his judgement about the
constitutionality of the potential ratification of the Copenhagen treaty seems
unjustified, his concern about the pitfalls of climate multilateralism cannot
be discarded in the same light. Were the US Senate to ratify a Kyoto-style
treaty, it would have to ensure governmental protection of American interests.

23 Various objections raised by climate change sceptics are well-taken. It is
not unreasonable, for example, to demand that emerging economies, and
especially the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), not be
exonerated from the tremendous efforts necessary to deal with climate change,
although the priority of climate change deniers appears to be to find
arguments to stall any measure to address climate change. While they are quick
to point out the futility of unilateral action on the part of the United
States, they are also reluctant to endorse multilateral action. Taken
together, these two positions give one the impression that taking no action
continues to be the best course of action. The reason for this is that in
matters of environmental policy, American fiscal conservatives and
libertarians have tended to subjugate land health and high environmental
standards to the imperatives of economic growth.

24 Ari Fleischer, then spokesman for the George W. Bush White House, replied
to a journalist who asked him in 2001 whether American people ought to make
lifestyle adjustments in order to remedy energy challenges, that, to
paraphrase George H.W. Bush, the American way of life was not negotiable:

>   * 58 Ari Fleischer, “Press Briefing,” May 7, 2001, accessed April 29,
2013, http://georgewbush-whitehou (...)

>

>

> That's a big no. The President believes that it's an American way of life,
and that it should be the goal of policy makers to protect the American way of
life. The American way of life is a blessed one. And we have a bounty of
resources in this country. What we need to do is make certain that we're able
to get those resources in an efficient way, in a way that also emphasizes
protecting the environment and conservation, into the hands of consumers so
they can make the choices that they want to make as they live their lives day
to day.58

  * 59 James Inhofe, “Energy Tax Prevention Act: The Only End to Cap and Trade,” _Human Events_ , March 28, 2 (...)
  * 60 “No Climate Tax,” Americans for Prosperity, accessed May 2, 2013, http://www.noclimatetax.com/. 
  * 61 Ben Geman, “House GOP Leaders Pledge to Oppose Climate Tax,” _The Hill_ , November 15, 2012, accessed (...)

25In this case, the American way of life is clearly defined as the unlimited
and ever expanding ability of all American citizens to indulge in material
consumption. This is an aspect of the debate particularly embraced by climate
change deniers because it allows them to stand for the creation of wealth and
higher standards of living for the American middle class. Senator James Inhofe
wrote that his mission was to protect the average consumer from higher prices
and regulations in a 2011 article in _Human Events_.59 Three years earlier the
well-heeled and highly influential free-market advocacy group Americans for
Prosperity launched a No Climate Tax Pledge which described cap and trade as
“a massive tax hike” and required elected officials who endorse it never to
vote in favour of a bill creating a tax addressing global warming.60 Only a
few days after Barack Obama won a second term, Republican Congressional
leaders signed this pledge.61

  * 62 Rael Jean Isaac, _Roosters of the Apocalypse_ (Chicago: The Heartland Institute, 2012), 26.
  * 63 Ibid., 2.
  * 64 Ibid., 41.
  * 65 Milloy, _Green Hell_ , 33.
  * 66 J. Baird Callicott, “5 Questions,” in _Sustainability Ethics_ , ed. Ryne Raffaelle, Wade Robinson, an (...)

26 Jean Isaac, a sociologist at the Heartland Institute, recently endeavoured
to drive the point home by characterising cap and trade as “a huge tax on
energy”62 in her book _Roosters of the Apocalypse_ , claiming that the
implementation of the environmental movement’s agenda would amount to
“economic suicide.”63 She also charges American environmentalists with being
hell-bent on curtailing high living standards and American prosperity rather
than being genuinely willing to protect the environment.64 This theme also
looms very large in Steve Milloy’s _Green Hell_. As far as Milloy is
concerned, defeating the environmental movement’s agenda is not merely a way
to protect individual freedom, but also a way to prevent environmentalists
from liquidating the American way of life altogether: “If our energy supply
were threatened, then all our comforts and conveniences that stem from it—in
other words, the American way of life—would be endangered as well.”65 The
proponents of small government appear to be unmoved by J. Baird Callicott’s
caveat that “the human economy is a subset of ecology.”66 Their position is
often predicated on the assumption that economic growth must always come first
and that protecting the environment can only be ancillary to growth. Even
though there is little doubt that such an approach will lead to a dead end, it
does make political sense in the short term: branding themselves as the
intransigent advocates of the American way of life allows climate deniers to
attack their adversaries from a position of strength.

27 To complicate matters, high-profile advocates of climate action like Al
Gore and Barack Obama have sometimes been unclear about the radical social and
economic adjustments that addressing the challenges posed by global warming
would require. In _The Assault on Reason_ , Al Gore seems to imply that the
American dedication to high consumption and economic growth will not need to
be called into question, that quite the opposite holds true:

>   * 67 Gore, _Assault_ , 214.

>

>

> The opportunity presented by the climate crisis is not only the opportunity
for new and better jobs, new technologies, new opportunities for profit, and a
higher quality of life. It gives us an opportunity to experience something
that few generations ever have the privilege of knowing: a common purpose
compelling enough to lift us above our limitations and motivate us to set
aside some of the bickering to which as human beings we are naturally
vulnerable.67

  * 68 Pooley, _Climate_ , 349.

28Barack Obama has also made several declarations to the same effect. Eric
Pooley, author of _The Climate War_ , begs to differ. Although he never claims
that climate action would wreak economic havoc, he also makes it plain that
such a policy would have far-reaching repercussions on the average citizen’s
lifestyle, as suggested in his account of congressional debates over cap and
trade: “On the day Waxman released his bill, the Senate passed another
resolution 89-8, saying that any climate bill must achieve its goals ‘without
increasing gasoline or energy prices’—in other words, the Senate was only in
favor of a climate bill that didn’t do anything.”68Bill McKibben has also been
straightforward about the profound change needed to make a difference:

>   * 69 Bill McKibben, “Climate of Denial,” _Mother Jones_ , May/June 2005,
accessed April 30, 2013, http://w (...)

>

>

> To reduce the amount of CO2 pouring into the atmosphere means dramatically
reducing the amount of fossil fuel being consumed. Which means changing the
underpinning of the planet’s entire economy and altering our most ingrained
personal habits. Even under the best scenarios, this will involve something
more like a revolution than a technical fix.69

29Downplaying the impact of climate action on people’s lives undermines the
case made by environmentalists and leaves them open to easy criticism from
climate change deniers.

  * 70 Pooley, _Climate_ , 360.
  * 71 Michael Grunwald, _The New New Deal_ (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 2012), 352-379.

30 The reluctance to present the implications of a serious government policy
on global warming in a more straightforward manner has a great deal to do with
misgivings about the public’s response. Raising public awareness about global
warming is one thing, and it is hard enough, but convincing the public to
change its behavior in order to avert global warming is quite another. In his
account of the climate wars, Eric Pooley noted that Rahm Emanuel, President
Obama’s Chief of Staff during his first two years in office, urged the
president not to spend political capital on a climate bill because it did not
appeal to the public and it would therefore be a nonstarter in the Senate.70
That is partly the reason why President Obama decided to throw his political
weight behind healthcare reform rather than cap and trade in his first term.
To be sure it would be unfair to state that President Obama did nothing to
address the climate crisis. As Michael Grunwald has documented in his account
of Barack Obama’s first term, the President allocated a considerable portion
of stimulus money to invest in clean and renewable energies.71 The fact
remains that the Obama administration shied away from actively supporting the
Waxman-Markey Bill because it was afraid of becoming unpopular. This attitude
goes a long way towards accounting for the climate change deniers’ emphasis on
the putative costs of climate action. It also begs one crucial question: were
Barack Obama and Rahm Emanuel right in thinking that the public would not have
accepted the passage of a cap-and-trade bill?

  * 72 Stimson, _Tides_ , 44.
  * 73 “Dead Aim: Joe Manchin for West Virginia,” accessed May 2, 2013, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xI (...)

31 Political scientist James Stimson appears to believe otherwise. Judging
from the data collected regarding public attitudes towards environmental
regulations, the American people tend to be less disinclined to support
serious environmental measures despite their economic repercussions than Rahm
Emanuel believes: “The public wanted and still wants environmental
improvements, and it wanted it regardless of trade-offs. That’s what the data
show. Given a choice between doing more about the environment and anything
else, the environment wins.”72 It should be noted that Stimson’s comment is a
general one about American attitudes towards environmental policy, and not
about global warming _per se_. Yet, there is no question that his analysis of
public opinion in the United States seems to contradict the assumptions
underpinning President Obama’s climate strategy. One may wonder whether
Stimson’s evidence proves that the public is environmentally-friendly as a
matter of principle but would be actually unwilling to live with the actual
consequences of strong environmental regulations, or whether Rahm Emanuel was
wrong in assuming that American voters would punish legislators for taking
tough action in favor of protecting the climate. Whatever the case may be, in
2009 many members of Congress—both Republicans and Democrats—gave credence to
Emanuel’s assessment of the state of public opinion. If in fact most
Republicans were dead set against the Waxman-Markey Bill, a significant number
of Democrats also proved lukewarm about the bill if not downright hostile to
it. The 2012 campaign for re-election to the US Senate by Joe Manchin, a
Democratic Senator from coal-rich West Virginia, is a case in point. He
captured the attention of the commentariat with his campaign ad “Dead Aim” in
which he expressed his rejection of climate legislation by shooting at a piece
of paper bearing the inscription “cap and trade.”73 Such clear-cut stands make
the possibility of decisive climate action in the next four years very
unlikely.

# 5. CONCLUSION

32 It is worth bearing in mind that the origins and motives of the American
climate change denial movement are highly complex and cannot be merely
described as the upshot of an attempt on the part of the energy sector to ward
off regulation—although this interpretation sheds light on a large part of the
movement. Climate change deniers also illustrate the strong ideological forces
that have been shaping Republican politics over the last few decades. The
generally accepted scientific explanation for global warming significantly
damages the soundness of the ideological pro-market position which the
American conservative movement has been embracing since the Reagan era and the
end of the Cold War. The central contribution of human activities to the
warming of our planet does not destroy the case for a market economy _per se_
; it does, however, put a dent in the validity of the American Right’s faith
in the free market as the ultimate solution to all social, economic, and
environmental problems. In effect, conceding defeat in the climate war would
have devastating repercussions on the intellectual bearings of many
conservative officials and activists. So far, for the most part, with a few
notable exceptions like former Utah Governor Jon Huntsman and Arizona Senator
John McCain, it has been a defeat too hard to swallow. While the scientific
case of climate deniers has now been seriously discredited, their economic
arguments will certainly continue to carry a lot of weight in American
politics in the years to come.

  * 74

33 Finally, the resilience of the climate change denial movement in the face
of mounting scientific evidence also highlights the weaknesses of their
proponents’ own ideology. Broadly defined, the ideology of the proponents of
strong climate action points to a willingness to adapt to the limitations
imposed on modern civilisations by ecosystems and the biosphere. Yet, their
reluctance to be more straightforward about the major cultural and behavioural
changes that would inevitably stem from more ecologically-sensitive climate
policies demonstrates that the implications of the policies they advocate are
not completely developed. In addition, their irenic 74perception of the
international community and its potential for well-coordinated, effective
climate-related action does not bode well for the future. When it comes to
laying out international measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, US
proponents of strong climate-related action place a disproportionate burden on
developed countries like the United States. Although from a historical and
moral perspective this approach may seem justified, global warming remains
first and foremost a global problem impossible to solve without the full
participation of all countries, including developing countries.

Top of page

## Bibliography

Allègre, Claude. L’imposture climatique ou la fausse écologie. Paris: Plon,
2010.

Allin, Craig W. The Politics of Wilderness Preservation. Fairbanks, AK: The
University of Alaska Press, [1982], 2008.

Armey, Dick, and Matt Kibbe. Give Us Liberty: A Tea Party Manifesto. New York:
Harper Collins, 2010.

Barnejee, Neela. “Mitt Romney Worked to Combat Climate Change as Governor.”
The Los

Angeles Times, June 13, 2012. Accessed April 29, 2013.
http://articles.latimes.com/2012/jun/13/nation/la-na-romney-energy-20120613.

Boccia, Romina, Jack Spencer, and Robert Gordon Jr. “Environmental
Conservation Based on Individual Liberty and Economic Freedom.” The Heritage
Foundation. Backgrounder n°2758 (January 8, 2013): 1-8. Accessed April 4,
2013. http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2013/01/environmental-
conservation-based-on-individual-liberty-and-economic-freedom.

Borowski, Julie. “Earth Day Special: Private Property Protects the
Environment.” Freedom Works, 20 Apr. 2012. Accessed April 4, 2013.
http://www.freedomworks.org/blog/jborowski/private-property-protects-
environment.

Brownstein, Ronald. The Second Civil War: How Extreme Partisanship Has
Paralyzed Washington and Divided America. New York: Penguin, 2007.

Callicott, J. Baird. “From the Land Ethic to the Earth Ethic: Aldo Leopold and
the Gaia Hypothesis.” In Gaia in Turmoil: Climate Change, Biodepletion, and
Earth Ethics in an Age of Crisis, edited by Eileen Crist, H. Bruce Rinker, and
Bill McKibben, 177-194. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2009.

---. “5 Questions.” In Sustainability Ethics, edited by Ryne Raffaelle, Wade Robinson, and Evan Selinger, 57-70. Copenhagen: Automatic Press/VIP, 2010.

Cornwall Alliance. “An Evangelical Declaration on Global Warming.” Accessed
April 29, 2013. http://www.cornwallalliance.org/articles/read/an-evangelical-
declaration-on-global-warming/.

Courtillot, Vincent. Nouveau Voyage au centre de la Terre. Paris: Odile Jacob,
[2009], 2011.

Crichton, Michael. “The Role of Science in Environmental Policy-Making.” US
Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works Hearing Statements, October
28, 2005. Accessed April 29, 2013.
http://epw.senate.gov/hearing_statements.cfm?id=246766.

---. State of Fear. New York: Harper Collins, [2004], 2009.

Dunlop, Norton. “Federalism and Free Markets: The Right Environmental Agenda.”
The

Heritage Foundation, March 9, 2006. Accessed April 29, 2013.
http://www.heritage.org/about/speeches/federalism-and-free-markets-the-right-
environmental-agenda.

Fleischer, Ari. Press Briefing, 7 May 2001. Accessed April 29, 2013.
http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/briefings/20010507.html.

Geman, Ben. “House GOP Leaders Pledge to Oppose Climate Tax.” The Hill,
November 15, 2012. Accessed April 29, 2013.
http://thehill.com/blogs/e2-wire/e2-wire/268289-house-gop-leaders-pledge-to-
oppose-climate-tax.

Gerson, Michael. “Climate Change and the Culture War.” The Washington Post,
January 17, 2012. Accessed April 29, 2013.
http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/climate-and-the-culture-
war/2012/01/16/gIQA6qH63P_story.html.

Goklany, Indur. “What to Do About Climate Change.” Cato Institute Policy
Analysis 609 (February 2008): 1-28. Accessed April 4, 2013.
http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/pa-609.pdf.

Gore, Al. The Assault on Reason. London: Bloomsbury, 2007. Kindle edition.

---. “Climate of Denial.” Rolling Stone, June 22, 2011. Accessed April 30, 2013. http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/climate-of-denial-20110622.

Gottlieb, Robert. Forcing the Spring: The Transformation of the American
Environmental Movement. Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993.

Green, Kenneth P. “Not Going Away: America’s Energy Security, Jobs and Climate

Challenges.” Statement before the House Select Committee on Energy
Independence and Global Warming, December 1, 2010. Accessed April 29, 2013.
http://www.aei.org/speech/energy-and-the-environment/climate-change/not-going-
away-americas-energy-security-jobs-and-climate-challenges/.

Groves, Steven. “The ‘Kyoto II’ Climate Change Treaty: Implications for
American Sovereignty.” The Heritage Foundation. Copenhagen Consequences.
Analysis of the 2009 Copenhagen UN Climate Change Conference n°5 (November 17,
2009). Accessed July 23, 2013.
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2009/11/the-kyoto-ii-climate-change-
treaty-implications-for-american-sovereignty.

---. “National Sovereignty May Melt at Climate Conference.” The Heritage Foundation. Commentary (December 4, 2009). Accessed July 23, 2013. http://www.heritage.org/research/commentary/2009/12/national-sovereignty-may-melt-at-climate-conference.

---. “Why Does Sovereignty Matter to America?” The Heritage Foundation. Understanding America (2010). Accessed July 23, 2013. http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2010/12/why-does-sovereignty-matter-to-america.

Grunwald, Michael. The New New Deal. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2012.

Hoggan, James. Climate Cover-Up: The Crusade to Deny Global Warming.
Vancouver: Greystone Books, 2009.

Inhofe, James. “Energy Tax Prevention Act: The Only End to Cap and Trade.”
Human Events, March 28, 2011. Accessed April 29, 2013.
http://www.humanevents.com/2011/03/28/energy-tax-prevention-act-the-only-end-
to-cap-and-trade/.

Isaac, Rael Jean. Roosters of the Apocalypse. Chicago: The Heartland
Institute, 2012.

Jacques, Peter J., Riley E. Dunlap, and Mark Freeman. “The Organization of
Denial: Conservative Think Tanks and Environmental Scepticism.” Environmental
Politics 17.3 (June 2008): 349-385.

James, Sallie. “A Harsh Climate for Trade: How Climate Change Proposals
Threaten Global Commerce.” Trade Policy Analysis 41 (September 2009): 1-20.
Accessed April 4 2013.
http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/tpa-041.pdf.

Johnson, Jason Scott. “A Looming Policy Disaster.” Regulation 31.3 (Fall
2008): 38-44. Accessed April 4, 2013.
http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/serials/files/regulation/2008/9/v31n3-1.pdf.

Krauthammer, Charles. “Carbon Chastity.” The Washington Post, May 30, 2008.
Accessed April 30, 2013.
http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2008-05-30/opinions/36813249_1_socialism-
carbon-chastity-co2into.

Loris, Nicolas, and Brett D. Schaefer. “Climate Change: How the United States
Should Lead.” The Heritage Foundation. Issue Brief n°3841 (January 24, 2013).
Accessed April 4, 2013.
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2013/01/climate-change-how-the-us-
should-lead.

Mann, Michael E. The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars: Dispatches from the
Front Lines. New York: Columbia University Press, 2012.

McKibben, Bill. “Climate of Denial.” Mother Jones, May/June 2005. Accessed
April 30, 2013. http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2005/05/climate-denial.

Michaels, Patrick J. “Global Warming and Climate Change.” In Cato Handbook for
Policymakers, 7th ed., edited by David Boaz, 474-488. Washington, DC: Cato
Institute, 2009.

Milloy, Steve. Green Hell: How Environmentalists Plan to Control your Life and
What You Can Do to Stop Them. Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing Inc., 2009.

Mooney, Chris. The Republican War on Science. New York: Basic Books, [2005],
2006.

Morgan, Derrick. “A Carbon Tax Would Harm US Competitiveness and Low-Income
Americans Without Helping the Environment.” The Heritage Foundation.
Backgrounder n°2720 (August 21, 2012). Accessed July 23, 2013.
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2012/08/a-carbon-tax-would-harm-us-
competitiveness-and-low-income-americans-without-helping-the-environment.

Oreskes, Naomi. “Beyond the Ivory Tower: The Scientific Consensus on Climate
Change.” Science 306 (5702): 1686.

Oreskes, Naomi, and Erik M. Conway. Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of
Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming.
London: Bloomsbury, [2010], 2012.

Pinchot, Gifford. Breaking New Ground. Washington, DC: Island Press, [1947],
1987.

Pooley, Eric. The Climate Wars: True Believers, Power Brokers, and the Fight
to Save the Earth. New York: Hyperion, 2010.

Posner, Eric A., and Cass R. Sumstein. “Global Warming and Social Justice.”
Regulation 31.1 (Spring 2008): 14-20. Accessed April 4, 2013.
http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/serials/files/regulation/2008/2/v31n1-3.pdf.

Richards, Jay Wesley. “The Economy Hits Home: Energy and the Environment.”
Washington: The Heritage Foundation, undated. Accessed April 4, 2013.
http://thf_media.s3.amazonaws.com/2009/pdf/EconHitsHome_Environment.pdf.

Romney, Mitt. No Apology: Believe in America. New York: Saint Martin’s
Griffin, 2010.

Scissors, Derek. “China Will Follow the United States: A Climate Change
Fable.” The Heritage Foundation. WebMemo n°2327 (March 5, 2009). Accessed July
23, 2013. http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2009/03/china-will-follow-
the-us-a-climate-change-fable.

Stimson, James A. Tides of Consent: How Public Opinion Shapes American
Politics. New York: Cambridge University Press, [2004], 2009.

Taylor, Jerry. “Environmental Policy.” In Cato Handbook for Policymakers, 7th
ed., edited by David Boaz, 463-474. Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute, 2009.

Will, George F. “Global Warming Advocates Ignore the Boulders.” The Washington
Post, February 21, 2010. Accessed April 30, 2013.
http://newstrust.net/stories/853779/toolbar.

Wing, Nick. “John Shimkus, GOP Rep. Who Denies Climate Change on Religious
Grounds, Could Lead House Environmental Policy.” The Huffington Post, November
13, 2010. Accessed April 30, 2013.
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/11/13/john-shimkus-climate-
change_n_782664.html.

Winner, Langdom. The Whale and the Reactor: A Search for Limits in an Age of
High Technology. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 1986.

Zernike, Kate. Boiling Mad: Inside Tea Party America. New York: Times Books,
2010.

Top of page

## Notes

1 Claude Allègre, _L’imposture climatique ou la fausse écologie_ (Paris: Plon,
2010). Vincent Courtillot, _Nouveau Voyage au centre de la Terre_ (Paris:
Odile Jacob 2011).

2 The lobbying activities of the Koch brother (Charles G. Koch and David H.
Koch) who own Koch Industries have received considerable media attention over
the last few years. For several decades, they have been funding various free-
market and libertarian advocacy groups with a view to shaping the decision-
making process.

3 Among the most prominent think tanks involved in the climate change denial
movement are the American Enterprise Institute, the George C. Marshall
Institute, the Heartland Institute, the Cato Institute, and the Heritage
Foundation. This list is far from exhaustive.

4 James A. Stimson, _Tides of Consent: How Public Opinion Shapes American
Politics_ (Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 45.

5 Craig W. Allin, _The Politics of Wilderness Preservation_ (Fairbanks, AK:
The University of Alaska Press, 2008), 3-24.

6 Robert Gottlieb, _Forcing the Spring: The Transformation of the American
Environmental Movement_ (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993), 117-161.

7 See the EPA website for the complete text of the Clean Air Act:
http://www.epa.gov/air/caa, last updated February 17, 2012.

8 See the EPA website for the complete text of the Clean Water Act:
http://www.epa.gov/lawsregs/laws/cwa.html, last updated April 16, 2013.

9 See the website of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for
the complete text of the Endangered Species Act:
http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/laws/esa/, last updated March 7, 2013.

10 See the EPA website for a summary of the history of the EPA:
http://www2.epa.gov/aboutepa/epa-history, last updated May 1, 2013.

11 It is noteworthy that the land management policies sought by the Cato
Institute and the Heritage Foundation bear an uncanny resemblance to those of
the era predating federal conservation: Gifford Pinchot and his followers set
out to rationalize the way in which natural resources were exploited through
scientifically-based management under federal supervision. Pinchot’s
autobiography makes it clear that his goal had been to remedy the havoc
wreaked by easy access to property, free enterprise, and unregulated use of
natural resources. See Gifford Pinchot, _Breaking New Ground_ (Washington, DC:
Island Press, 1987), 509. Pinchot understood fully well that federal
conservation hinged on extensive public ownership and a reversal of the
privatizing process initiated by the Founding Fathers. As the bureaucratic
apparatus of federal conservation was reinforced extensively in the 1960s and
1970s, Pinchot’s perspective, the anathema of small-government conservatives,
remained the order of the day. According to the Heritage Foundation’s
conservation experts, environmental regulations are just one aspect of “the
insatiable growth of the regulatory state.” What is more, they argue, active
public management of natural resources is bound to be self-defeating,
inefficient and inferior to the outcomes produced by market mechanisms. See
Romina Boccia, Jack Spencer, and Robert Gordon Jr., “Environmental
Conservation Based on Individual Liberty and Economic Freedom,” The Heritage
Foundation, _Backgrounder_ n°2758 (January 8, 2013): 2, accessed April 4,
2013, http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2013/01/environmental-
conservation-based-on-individual-liberty-and-economic-freedom. Their experts
claim that, except for Yosemite and Yellowstone national parks, the federal
government would be well-advised to privatize the public domain completely
(Ibid., 3). The libertarian Cato Institute has endorsed the same position
(Taylor “Environmental Policy,” 463-464).

12 Chris Mooney, _The Republican War on Science_ (New York: Basic Books,
2006), 30-32.

13 Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway, _Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of
Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming_
(London: Bloomsbury, 2012), 6.

14 Ibid., 169-215.

15 Al Gore, _The Assault on Reason_ (London: Bloomsbury, 2007), Kindle
edition, 199.

16 Al Gore, “Climate of Denial,” _Rolling Stone_ , June 22, 2011, accessed
April 30, 2013, http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/climate-of-
denial-20110622.

17 Mann has been the unfortunate target of vicious _ad hominem_ attacks by
climate change deniers who fault him for the “hockey-stick” graph which
highlights the abnormal rise in temperatures in the last decades of the 20 th
century. See for example http://www.businessinsider.com/michael-mann-
describes-life-as-a-target-2013-3, last updated March 27, 2013.

18 Michael E. Mann, _The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars: Dispatches from
the Front Lines_ (New York: Columbia University Press, 2012), 3-4.

19 Cap and trade is defined as a market-based plan to reduce carbon emissions
in which the government sets a cap to limit emissions and issues pollution
credits which companies can buy and sell as they wish, the point being that
those that pollute less can sell their extra credits to those that pollute
more so that overall emissions do not rise above the cap. Ultimately the
government imposes fines to companies who do not abide by this framework. Cap
and trade was at the heart of the Waxman-Markey Bill that failed in Congress
in 2009.

20 “Oil and Gas: Lobbying, 2012,” Center for Responsive Politics, accessed May
2, 2013,
http://www.opensecrets.org/industries/lobbying.php?cycle=2012&ind=E01.

21 Eric Pooley, _The Climate Wars: True Believers, Power Brokers, and the
Fight to Save the Earth_ (New York: Hyperion, 2010), 186.

22 “Influence and Lobbying: Oil and Gas,” Center for Responsive Politics,
accessed May 2, 2013, http://www.opensecrets.org/industries/indus.php?ind=E01.

23 “Oil and Gas Lobbying, 2012.”

24 “Environment: Lobbying, 2012,” Center for Responsive Politics, accessed May
2, 2013,
http://www.opensecrets.org/industries/lobbying.php?cycle=2012&ind=Q11.

25 Peter J. Jacques, Riley E. Dunlap and Mark Freeman, “The Organization of
Denial: Conservative Think Tanks and Environmental Scepticism,” _Environmental
Politics_ 17.3 (June 2008): 360.

26 Nick Wing, “John Shimkus, GOP Rep. Who Denies Climate Change on Religious
Grounds, Could Lead House Environmental Policy,” _The Huffington Post_ ,
November 13, 2010, accessed April 30, 2013,
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/11/13/john-shimkus-climate-
change_n_782664.html. “An Evangelical Declaration on Global Warming,” Cornwall
Alliance, accessed April 29, 2013,
http://www.cornwallalliance.org/articles/read/an-evangelical-declaration-on-
global-warming/.

27 Julie Borowski, “Earth Day Special: Private Property Protects the
Environment,” Freedom Works, April 20, 2012, accessed April 4, 2013,
http://www.freedomworks.org/blog/jborowski/private-property-protects-
environment. Norton Dunlop, “Federalism and Free Markets: The Right
Environmental Agenda,” The Heritage Foundation, March 9, 2006, accessed April
29, 2013, http://www.heritage.org/about/speeches/federalism-and-free-markets-
the-right-environmental-agenda.

28 Jay Wesley Richards, “The Economy Hits Home: Energy and the Environment”
(Washington: The Heritage Foundation, Undated), 14, accessed April 4, 2013,
http://thf_media.s3.amazonaws.com/2009/pdf/EconHitsHome_Environment.pdf.

29 Kate Zernike, _Boiling Mad: Inside Tea Party America_ (New York: Times
Books, 2010), 37.

30 Dick Armey and Matt Kibbe, _Give Us Liberty: A Tea Party Manifesto_ (New
York: Harper Collins, 2010), 90-91.

31 Ibid., 95-96.

32 J. Baird Callicott, “From the Land Ethic to the Earth Ethic: Aldo Leopold
and the Gaia Hypothesis,” in _Gaia in Turmoil: Climate Change, Biodepletion,
and Earth Ethics in an Age of Crisis_ , ed. Eileen Crist, H. Bruce Rinker, and
Bill McKibben (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2009), 191.

33 Oreskes and Conway, _Merchants_ , 238.

34 See the website of the United States Climate Action Partnership,
http://www.us-cap.org/.

35 Michael Gerson, “Climate Change and the Culture War,” _The Washington Post_
, January 17, 2012, accessed April 29, 2013,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/climate-and-the-culture-
war/2012/01/16/gIQA6qH63P_story.html.

36 Michael Crichton, _State of Fear_ (New York: Harper Collins, 2009).

37 Michael Crichton, “The Role of Science in Environmental Policy-Making,” US
Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works Hearing Statements, October
28, 2005, accessed April 29, 2013,
http://epw.senate.gov/hearing_statements.cfm?id=246766.

38 George F. Will, “Global Warming Advocates Ignore the Boulders,” _The
Washington Post_ , February 21, 2010, accessed April 30, 2013,
http://newstrust.net/stories/853779/toolbar.

39 Steve Milloy, _Green Hell: How Environmentalists Plan to Control your Life
and What You Can Do to Stop Them_ (Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing Inc.,
2009), 234.

40 Charles Krauthammer, “Carbon Chastity,” _The Washington Post_ , May 30,
2008, accessed April 30, 2013,
http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2008-05-30/opinions/36813249_1_socialism-
carbon-chastity-co2into.

41 Neela Barnejee, “Mitt Romney Worked to Combat Climate Change as Governor,”
_The Los_

_Angeles Times_ , June 13, 2012, accessed April 29, 2013,
http://articles.latimes.com/2012/jun/13/nation/la-na-romney-energy-20120613.

42 Mitt Romney, _No Apology: Believe in America_ (New York: Saint Martin’s
Griffin, 2010), 243.

43 Ronald Brownstein, _The Second Civil War: How Extreme Partisanship Has
Paralyzed_

_Washington and Divided America_ (New York: Penguin, 2007), 11-13.

44 Naomi Oreskes, “Beyond the Ivory Tower: The Scientific Consensus on Climate
Change,” _Science_ 306 (5702): 1686.

45 James Hoggan, _Climate Cover-Up: The Crusade to Deny Global Warming_
(Vancouver: Greystone Books, 2009), 118.

46 Kenneth P. Green, “Not Going Away: America’s Energy Security, Jobs and
Climate Challenges,” Statement before the House Select Committee on Energy
Independence and Global Warming, December 1, 2010, accessed April 29, 2013,
http://www.aei.org/speech/energy-and-the-environment/climate-change/not-going-
away-americas-energy-security-jobs-and-climate-challenges/.

47 Indur Goklany, “What to Do About Climate Change,” _Cato Institute Policy
Analysis_ 609 (February 2008): 3, accessed April 4, 2013,
http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/pa-609.pdf.Patrick J.
Michaels, “Global Warming and Climate Change,” in _Cato Handbook for
Policymakers, 7_ _th_ _ed._ ,ed. David Boaz (Washington, DC: Cato Institute,
2009), 475. Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sumstein, “Global Warming and Social
Justice,” _Regulation_ 31.1 (Spring 2008): 19, accessed April 4, 2013,
http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/serials/files/regulation/2008/2/v31n1-3.pdf.

48 Sallie James, “A Harsh Climate for Trade: How Climate Change Proposals
Threaten Global Commerce,” _Trade Policy Analysis_ 41 (September 2009): 4,
accessed April 4, 2013,
http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/tpa-041.pdf.

49 Derrick Morgan, “A Carbon Tax Would Harm US Competitiveness and Low-Income
Americans Without Helping the Environment,” The Heritage Foundation,
Backgrounder n°2720 (August 21, 2012), 4, accessed July 23, 2013,
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2012/08/a-carbon-tax-would-harm-us-
competitiveness-and-low-income-americans-without-helping-the-environment.

50 Ibid., 5.

51 Nicolas Loris and Brett D. Schaefer, “Climate Change: How the United States
Should Lead,” The Heritage Foundation, Issue Brief n°3841 (January 24, 2013),
accessed April 4, 2013,
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2013/01/climate-change-how-the-us-
should-lead.

52 Steven Groves, “The ‘Kyoto II’ Climate Change Treaty: Implications for
American Sovereignty,” The Heritage Foundation, Copenhagen Consequences,
Analysis of the 2009 Copenhagen UN Climate Change Conference n°5 (November 17,
2009), 3, accessed July 23, 2013,
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2009/11/the-kyoto-ii-climate-change-
treaty-implications-for-american-sovereignty.

53 Steven Groves, “National Sovereignty May Melt at Climate Conference,” The
Heritage Foundation, Commentary (December 4, 2009), accessed July 23, 2013,
http://www.heritage.org/research/commentary/2009/12/national-sovereignty-may-
melt-at-climate-conference.

54 Derek Scissors, “China Will Follow the United States: A Climate Change
Fable,” The Heritage Foundation, WebMemo n°2327 (March 5, 2009), 1, accessed
July 23, 2013, http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2009/03/china-will-
follow-the-us-a-climate-change-fable.

55 Pooley, _Climate_ , 429-431.

56 Groves, “National Sovereignty”.

57 Steven Groves, “Why Does Sovereignty Matter to America?,” The Heritage
Foundation, Understanding America, 2010, 7-8, accessed July 23, 2013,
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2010/12/why-does-sovereignty-matter-
to-america.

58 Ari Fleischer, “Press Briefing,” May 7, 2001, accessed April 29, 2013,
http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/briefings/20010507.html.

59 James Inhofe, “Energy Tax Prevention Act: The Only End to Cap and Trade,”
_Human Events_ , March 28, 2011, accessed April 29, 2013,
http://www.humanevents.com/2011/03/28/energy-tax-prevention-act-the-only-end-
to-cap-and-trade/.

60 “No Climate Tax,” Americans for Prosperity, accessed May 2, 2013,
http://www.noclimatetax.com/.

61 Ben Geman, “House GOP Leaders Pledge to Oppose Climate Tax,” _The Hill_ ,
November 15, 2012, accessed April 29, 2013,
http://thehill.com/blogs/e2-wire/e2-wire/268289-house-gop-leaders-pledge-to-
oppose-climate-tax.

62 Rael Jean Isaac, _Roosters of the Apocalypse_ (Chicago: The Heartland
Institute, 2012), 26.

63 Ibid., 2.

64 Ibid., 41.

65 Milloy, _Green Hell_ , 33.

66 J. Baird Callicott, “5 Questions,” in _Sustainability Ethics_ , ed. Ryne
Raffaelle, Wade Robinson, and Evan Selinger (Copenhagen: Automatic Press/VIP,
2010), 62.

67 Gore, _Assault_ , 214.

68 Pooley, _Climate_ , 349.

69 Bill McKibben, “Climate of Denial,” _Mother Jones_ , May/June 2005,
accessed April 30, 2013, http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2005/05/climate-
denial.

70 Pooley, _Climate_ , 360.

71 Michael Grunwald, _The New New Deal_ (New York: Simon  & Schuster, 2012),
352-379.

72 Stimson, _Tides_ , 44.

73 “Dead Aim: Joe Manchin for West Virginia,” accessed May 2, 2013,
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xIJORBRpOPM.

74

Top of page

## References

### Electronic reference

**Jean-Daniel Collomb** , « The Ideology of Climate Change Denial in the
United States », _European journal of American studies_ [Online], 9-1 | 2014,
document 5, Online since 01 April 2014, connection on 06 June 2019. URL :
http://journals.openedition.org/ejas/10305 ; DOI : 10.4000/ejas.10305

Top of page

## About the author

### Jean-Daniel Collomb

Maître de conférences, Université Jean Moulin, Lyon 3 (France),jean-
daniel.collomb@univ-lyon3.fr

Top of page

## Copyright

### Creative Commons License

![Creative Commons License](docannexe/image/8417/somerights20.png)

This text is under a Creative Commons license : Attribution-Noncommercial 2.5
Generic

Top of page

Contents - Previous document

# Browse

## Index

  * Authors
  * Cited Names
  * Keywords

## Full text issues

  * 14-1 | 2019  
Spring 2019

  * 13-4 | 2018  
Special Issue: Envisioning Justice: Mediating the Question of Rights in
American Visual Culture

  * 13-3 | 2018  
Special Issue: America to Poland: Cultural Transfers and Adaptations

  * 13-2 | 2018  
Summer 2018

  * 13-1 | 2018  
Special Issue: Animals on American Television

  * 12-4 | 2017  
Special Issue: Sound and Vision: Intermediality and American Music

  * 12-3 | 2017  
Special Issue of the European Journal of American Studies: Cormac McCarthy
Between Worlds

  * 12-2 | 2017  
Summer 2017, including Special Issue: Popularizing Politics: The 2016 U.S.
Presidential Election

  * 12-1 | 2017  
Spring 2017: Special Issue - Eleanor Roosevelt and Diplomacy in the Public
Interest

  * 11-3 | 2017  
Special Issue: Re-Queering The Nation: America’s Queer Crisis

  * 11-2 | 2016  
Summer 2016

  * 11-1 | 2016  
Special Issue: Intimate Frictions: History and Literature in the United States
from the 19th to the 21st Century

  * 10-3 | 2015  
Special Double Issue: The City

  * 10-2 | 2015  
Summer 2015, including Special Issue: (Re)visioning America in the Graphic
Novel

  * 10-1 | 2015  
Special Issue: Women in the USA

  * 9-3 | 2014  
Special Issue: Transnational Approaches to North American Regionalism

  * 9-2 | 2014  
Summer 2014

  * 9-1 | 2014  
Spring 2014

  * 8-1 | 2013  
Spring 2013

  * 7-2 | 2012  
Special Issue: Wars and New Beginnings in American History

  * 7-1 | 2012  
Spring 2012

  * 6-3 | 2011  
Special Issue: Postfrontier Writing

  * 6-2 | 2011  
Special Issue: Oslo Conference

  * 6-1 | 2011  
Spring 2011

  * 5-4 | 2010  
Special Issue: Film

  * 5-3 | 2010  
Summer 2010

  * 5-2 | 2010  
Special Issue: The North-West Pacific in the 18th and 19th Centuries

  * 5-1 | 2010  
Spring 2010

  * 4-3 | 2009  
Special Issue: Immigration

  * 4-2 | 2009  
Autumn 2009

  * 4-1 | 2009  
Spring 2009

  * 3-3 | 2008  
Autumn 2008

  * 3-2 | 2008  
Special Issue: May 68

  * 3-1 | 2008  
Spring 2008

  * 2-2 | 2007  
Autumn 2007

  * 2-1 | 2007  
Spring 2007

  * 1-1 | 2006  
Spring 2006

## All issues

## Book reviews

  * Reviews 2019-1
  * Reviews 2018-4
  * Reviews 2018-3
  * Reviews 2018-2
  * Reviews 2018-1
  * Reviews 2017-4
  * Reviews 2017-3
  * Reviews 2017-2
  * Reviews 2017-1
  * Reviews 2016-4
  * Reviews 2016-3
  * Reviews 2016-2
  * Reviews 2016-1
  * Reviews 2015-4
  * Reviews 2015-3
  * Reviews 2015-2
  * Reviews 2015-1
  * Reviews 2014-4
  * Reviews 2014-3
  * Reviews 2014-2
  * Reviews 2014-1
  * Reviews 2013-2
  * Reviews 2013-1
  * Reviews 2012-2
  * Reviews 2012-1
  * Reviews 2011-2
  * Reviews 2011-1
  * Reviews 2010-2
  * Reviews 2010-1
  * Reviews 2009
  * Reviews 2008
  * Accessing pre-2008 book reviews

## The Journal

  * What is EJAS ?
  * Editorial Committee
  * **Instructions for Contributors**
  * Book Reviews Information
  * Other European journals
  * The European library of American studies

## Information

  * Contact us
  * Website credits
  * Publishing policies

## Newsletters

  * EAAS Newsletters

## Follow us

  * ![RSS feed](images/social-icons/rss.png) RSS feed

## Newsletters

  * OpenEdition Newsletter

## In collaboration with

  * ![OpenEdition Journals](images/logo-revues-org.png)

Electronic ISSN 1991-9336

Site map - Contact us - Website credits - Syndication

OpenEdition Journals member - Published with Lodel - Administration only

OpenEdition

  * OpenEdition Books
    * OpenEdition BooksBooks in the humanities and social sciences
    * Books
    * Publishers
    * Further information
  * OpenEdition Journals
    * OpenEdition JournalsJournals in the humanities and social sciences
    * Journals
    * Further information
  * Calenda
    * CalendaAcademic announcements
    * Announcements
    * Further information
  * Hypotheses

    * HypothesesResearch blogs
    * Blogs catalogue
  * Newsletters

    * NewsletterSubscribe to the newsletter
  * OpenEdition Freemium

the journal

in OpenEdition

Search

  * Informations
    * Title: European journal of American studies Briefly:

A journal presenting the research of European specialists of the United States

    
    
    * Publisher:
    European Association for American Studies
    

Medium:

    
    
    Électronique
    

E-ISSN:

    
    
    1991-9336
    * Access:
    Open access
    * Read detailed presentation
    

  * DOI / References
    * DOI: 10.4000/ejas.10305
    * Cite reference
  *   * Twitter

  * Facebook
  * Google +

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

