

  * ![Ecology Global Network Button](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/bar-egn-button.png)

  * ![Ecology Campus Network](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/bar-ecn-button.png)

  * ![Shop Ecology](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/bar-shopecology-button.png)
  * ![RSS News Feed Button](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/bar-rss-button.png)
  * ![Twitter](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/bar-twitter-button.png)
  * ![Facebook](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/bar-facebook-button.png)
  * ![Google Plus](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/bar-g-plus-button.png)

![Watch ](http://www.ecology.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/eco-ad-Replay-

leaderboard_100615.jpg)

![Ecology Global Network Logo](https://www.ecology.com/wp-

content/themes/ecology/images/eco-logo.png)

  * ![Ecology Today](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/top-nav/top-nav-eco-today.png)
  * ![Earth](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/top-nav/top-nav-earth.png)
  * ![Air](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/top-nav/top-nav-air.png)
  * ![Energy](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/top-nav/top-nav-energy.png)
  * ![Water](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/top-nav/top-nav-water.png)
  * ![Humans](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/top-nav/top-nav-humans.png)
  * ![Species](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/top-nav/top-nav-species.png)

  * ecoView

  * Inner Ecology
  * Planting for the Planet
  * ecoArts
  * ecoTipping
  * Ecology Kids

![](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/cat-

images/header-images/cat-header-earth.jpg)

  * The Earth
  * Ecosystems
  * Sustainability
  * Agriculture
  * Land Use
  * Urban Issues
  * Natural Resources
  * Natural Phenomenon
  * Space - Earth's Ecosystem

  * EARTH ON ECOLOGY TV

![Ecology Webinar Series](http://www.ecology.com/wp-

content/uploads/2015/10/eco-ads-Replay-skyscraper_100615.jpg)

![English](http://www.ecology.com/wp-

content/plugins/gtranslate/blank.png)![French](http://www.ecology.com/wp-

content/plugins/gtranslate/blank.png)![German](http://www.ecology.com/wp-

content/plugins/gtranslate/blank.png)![Italian](http://www.ecology.com/wp-

content/plugins/gtranslate/blank.png)![Spanish](http://www.ecology.com/wp-

content/plugins/gtranslate/blank.png)  
Select
LanguageAfrikaansAlbanianArabicArmenianAzerbaijaniBasqueBelarusianBulgarianCatalanChinese
(Simplified)Chinese
(Traditional)CroatianCzechDanishDutchEnglishEstonianFilipinoFinnishFrenchGalicianGeorgianGermanGreekHaitian
CreoleHebrewHindiHungarianIcelandicIndonesianIrishItalianJapaneseKoreanLatvianLithuanianMacedonianMalayMalteseNorwegianPersianPolishPortugueseRomanianRussianSerbianSlovakSlovenianSpanishSwahiliSwedishThaiTurkishUkrainianUrduVietnameseWelshYiddish

### Earth

# Paper Chase

By Guest, September 10, 2011

_By Sam Martin_

![Earth's Vegetation Map](http://ecology.com/wp-

content/uploads/2011/09/vegetation.jpg)

Nearly 4 billion trees worldwide are cut down each year for paper,
representing about 35 percent of all harvested trees. This world map shows the
Earth's vegetation.Source: NASA

Take a minute to look around the room you're in and notice how many things are
made out of paper. There may be books, a few magazines, some printer paper,
and perhaps a poster on the wall. Yet, if you consider that each person in the
United States uses 749 pounds (340kg) of paper every year (adding up to a
whopping 187 billion pounds (85 billion kg) per year for the entire
population, by far the largest per capita consumption rate of paper for any
country in the world), then you realize that paper comes in many more forms
than meets the eye.

World consumption of paper has grown 400 percent in the last 40 years. Now
nearly 4 billion trees or 35 percent of the total trees cut around the world
are used in paper industries on every continent. Besides what you can see
around you, paper comes in many forms from tissue paper to cardboard packaging
to stereo speakers to electrical plugs to home insulation to the sole inserts
in your tennis shoes. In short, paper is everywhere.

## Where Does the Paper Come From?

So where does it come from? Most people can guess that trees are the staple of
any paper product. But did you know that until the middle of the 19th century,
the main ingredient of paper was cloth rags? And while trees have since become
a vital component in the creation of paper, many manufacturers today are
beginning to use recycled waste combined with tree pulp to decrease the number
of trees that need to be cut down and keep up with the growing demand for
paper. Also, many environmentalists who believe that the world's forests are
being cut down faster than they can grow are pointing to the continued success
of wood-free paper made with other plants such as hemp and a similarly fibrous
plant called kenaf.

## The First Paperâ€¦

![Papyrus](http://ecology.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/papyrus.jpg)

Over 6,000 years ago, the Egyptians gave birth to paper by using the papyrus
plant as the source. The "paper plant" is native to central Africa and the
Nile River Valley and was in abundant supply in ancient Egypt. (Plant photos:
NY Botanical Gardens)

The first paper-like substance was invented by the Egyptians over 6,000 years
ago. Papyrus, which is the root of our English word paper, was made by weaving
reeds or other fibrous plants together and pounding them into a flat sheet.
The Greeks and the Romans also used this technique, although some Ancient
Greek paper makers were the first to create a kind of parchment paper made out
of animal skins. Chances are, Aristotle, Socrates and other Greek philosophers
originally wrote their books on the skins of dead cows.

But paper as we know it wasn't made until 105 AD, when a Chinese court
official named Ts'ai Lun mixed mulberry bark and hemp with water and scraps of
cotton and linen cloth (i.e. rags). This concoction was mashed into a pulp and
pressed into mats that were left in the sun to dry. Rags were the basis for
paper for the next 1700 years.

![Bamboo Paper](http://ecology.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/bamboo.jpg)

Modern paper was invented in 105 AD by the Chinese when they used tree parts
to make it. Some of the fine paper was made from bamboo fiber, such as the
example pictured here. (Franklin Institute)

As the Chinese culture flourished and expanded to the edges of the Asian
continent, paper went along with it, first to Korea and Japan and then to the
Arab world which included Egypt and Morocco. Yet, it wasn't until 1009 AD that
Papermaking reached Europe by way of Spain, where the first European paper
mill was set up by Arabs in Xativa, near the Mediterranean port city of
Valencia.

After that, the Italians and the French became notable paper makers and
dominated the paper industry in Europe from 1250 to 1470 AD. After the
invention of the moveable type printing press in 1453 by the German inventor
Johannes Gutenberg and the subsequent boom in literacy rates in the 16th
century, paper for books grew in demand. Paper mills began opening all over
the European continent and eventually reached the new world where the first
American paper mill opened in Philadelphia in 1690. That increase in demand
and the upsurge in papermaking began to tax the raw materials used to make
paper (which was still largely made with rags) and manufacturers began
searching for alternatives. It wasn't until 1843 that ground-wood (or pulp)
harvested from trees became the papermakers material of choice.

## The Modern Industry

![Kenaf Plant](http://ecology.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/kenaf.jpg)

The kenaf plant can quickly grow to between 12 - 18 feet in a few months.
These plants provide about three-five times more fiber per harvest than
southern pine trees, which can take 7-40 years before they can be harvested.
This makes kenaf an attractive tree-substitute for making paper with a growing
number of companies, like Vision Paper, which is devoted exclusively to making
paper from kenaf

Today, the world consumes about 300 million tons of paper each year. Most of
that paper is made from virgin pulp, but recycled paper accounts for 38
percent of the world's total fiber supply and non-wood fibers from plants like
hemp or kenaf make up 7 percent. The U.S., which contains only 5 percent of
the world's population, uses 30 percent of all paper. In that country, the
forest and paper products industry generates $200 billion dollars in sales
every year, accounting for 7 percent of the total manufacturing output of the
United States. About 28 percent of all wood cut in the U.S. is used for
papermaking.

Having come a long way from using rags and mulberry bark, papermaking has
become a sophisticated science. Once a tree is cut down, it goes to a mill
where it is debarked and then chipped into tiny fragments by a series of
whirling blades. These fragments are then "cooked" in a vat with water and
several chemicals, including caustic soda and sodium sulfate, to make a gooey
slurry known as pulp. In the final stages, additives such as starch, China
clay, talc and calcium carbonate are added to the pulp to improve the strength
and brightness of the paper. Then the pulp is bleached to a white color using
water and chlorine before being pressed into rolls and dried.

## The Environmental Impact

Unfortunately, the papermaking process is not a clean one. According to the
U.S. Toxic Release Inventory report published by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), pulp and paper mills are among the worst polluters to
air, water and land of any industry in the country. The Worldwatch Institute
offers similar statistics for the rest of the world. Each year millions of
pounds of highly toxic chemicals such as toluene, methanol, chlorine dioxide,
hydrochloric acid and formaldehyde are released into the air and water from
papermaking plants around the world.

![Private Forest](http://ecology.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/private-

forest.jpg)

Private forests - where trees are planted, harvested and replanted
specifically for paper and lumber - are a major source for paper production.
Pictured are trees being cleared for paper production. (Minnesota Forestry
Association)

Papermaking also uses up vast quantities of trees. But trees are a renewable
resource, which means that once one is cut down another can be planted in its
place. In fact, much of the wood used by paper companies in the U.S. comes
from privately owned tree farms, where forests are planted, groomed and
thinned for harvest in 20 to 35 year cycles, depending on the tree species.
Around the world, tree farms supply 16 percent of all wood used in the paper
industry, while the bulk comes from second growth forests. Less than 9 percent
of the wood used to make paper is harvested from old growth forests, which are
impossible to replace because of their maturity.

Yet, while tree farms or plantations help feed the demand for wood, they can't
provide the plant and animal diversity found in natural forests. Plus,
according to a 1996 report from the U.S. Forest Service, the rate of harvest
for softwood trees in the southern United States outpaced growth for the first
time since 1953.

## Alternatives to Cutting Down Trees

![Paper in Landfills](http://ecology.com/wp-

content/uploads/2011/09/recycle.jpg)

More than half of all paper produced in the US is kept out of landfills by
recycling it. Here waste paper has been sorted and prepared for recycling

For these reasons, there is a growing chorus of entrepreneurs,
environmentalists and inventors who are coming up with ways to make paper
without having to use as many chemicals or so many trees. Recycling is by far
the most common way to help save a tree. According to the Worldwatch
Institute, recycling efforts around the world recovered about 110 million
tons, or 43 percent, of all paper used. About 60 percent of all paper in the
United States was kept out of landfills in 2009 and in 2010, 77 percent of all
papermakers in the U.S. substitute some recycled paper for virgin wood in the
pulp-making stage. And 115 mills use only recycled waste as their primary
source of raw material.

Others point to agricultural waste as a stand in for wood. Agri-pulp, as it's
called, is wheat, oat, barley and other crop stalks left over after
harvesting. Combined with recycled paper and other fillers, some paper makers
are finding that agri-pulp paper makes fine stationery.

![Anka Industrial Hemp](http://ecology.com/wp-

content/uploads/2011/09/HempBee1.jpg)

Bee working on female flowers of Anka industrial hemp (a monoecious variety).
You can see both male and female flowers. Courtesy: Ontario Hemp Alliance

Hemp is a wood substitute that has a rich history in the papermaking industry,
from paper's origins in China in the first century AD to the Declaration of
Independence, which was written in the 18th century on hemp paper. Hemp is now
used to make rope and clothes as well as paper. Unfortunately, it is illegal
to grow hemp in the U.S. because it is a non-intoxicating variety of cannabis
sativa, the same plant marijuana comes from. For that reason, hemp must be
imported for use in the U.S.

Kenaf is also known as an excellent tree-substitute in making paper. This
4,000-year-old hibiscus plant -- an annual, non-wood fiber plant related to
okra and cotton -- is native to central Africa and can grow up to 18 feet tall
in a four -to-five month season. Like hemp, kenaf is naturally whiter than
wood and can be bleached with hydrogen peroxide instead of chlorine.

One of the major reasons paper mills are hesitant to convert to using kenaf or
hemp to make paper is because they are not set up to process anything except
trees. Converting a paper mill to process these wood pulp alternatives would
cost tens of millions of dollars and major coordination with their suppliers
and customers.

Still -- like the conversion of radio to television as the major entertainment
source in the 1950s and 1960s -- such a conversion from trees to non-wood
source materials in the papermaking process can ultimately provide
extraordinary economics for the manufacturers and the consumers. It's simply a
matter of the different groups within the industry agreeing on how to best
make it happen. And it's going to take consumers like you and me to start
buying recycled products as well as alternative pulp.

What's certain is that with so much of our daily lives dependent on the
material, paper is here to stay. Even email and the Internet haven't slowed
this demand. And yet, as research advances and the environmental impact
lessens, perhaps we'll be able to live comfortably with paper for the next six
thousand years.

_Updated September 10, 2011 by Susan Colby_

## Did You Knowâ€¦

  * The first paper merchant in America was Benjamin Franklin, who helped to start 18 paper mills in Virginia and surrounding areas.
  * Wood pulp is found in rayon material, laundry detergent, tires, and transmission belts.
  * The trees used to make paper in the United States come mostly from softwood forests-mostly pine-in the South and West.
  * In 1883 Philadelphia resident Charles Stillwell invented a machine to make brown paper bags so folks would have something to carry their groceries home in. Today more than 10 million paper bags are used annually in supermarkets throughout the country.
  * In 2010, recycled paper averaged 334 pounds for every person in the U.S. Hemp was grown commercially in the United States until the 1950s.
  * The single oldest living thing on Earth is a tree, a 4,700 year-old bristlecone pine tree in Nevada. It was growing when the Egyptians built the pyramids.
  * There are 747 million acres of forest land in the United States.
  * More than 2.3 billion tree seedlings are planted in the United States each year.

## Other Sources:

The European Paper Industry

American Forest and Paper Association

The American Tree Farm System

Environmental Protection Agency

The Worldwatch Institute

Boise Cascade Paper: Sustainability Policies

About the Kenaf Plant

Rainforest Action Network

Conservatree  
![](http://www.ecology.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/Ecology-

Recycling-90.gif)

### You might also like:

Ozone, Nitrogen Change the Way Rising CO2 Affects Earth's Water Cycle

Buy Local, Buy Green

Kids Need Trees

### 25 Responses to _Paper Chase_

  1. Pingback: Randy Says I'm Missing the News! | gamppart

  2. not_childish says:

December 10, 2011 at 5:19 am

Very informative. thanks!

  1. Q and A says:

January 12, 2012 at 6:17 pm

why is everyone so mean? thanks for the article!

    
    
    * ~Miranda~ says:
    

February 10, 2012 at 2:09 am

Trollsâ€¦. People who read things to post silly comments to waste peoples time
who use these articles appropriately for research or to satisfy a curiousity.

  1. Pingback: Good old Paper book or E-book? - Page 2

  2. Pingback: The Paperless Society: Myth or Reality? Â« Technology Futures

  3. Unkown Personer:) says:

March 18, 2012 at 10:04 pm

Idk if i SHOULD trust thisâ€¦â€¦

  1. smartest says:

April 22, 2012 at 9:10 pm

what is with all the weird comments?

    
    
    * michelle says:
    

November 12, 2012 at 2:01 pm

who knowsâ€¦ and by the way U R NOT THE SMARTEST!

    
    
      * lala says:
    

June 10, 2014 at 3:03 pm

or are they?

  1. Brian says:

June 12, 2012 at 9:19 pm

Thank you for the informative standpoint. Will be cited in my paper.

  1. I think we should says:

September 21, 2012 at 6:54 pm

Stating the obvious but we really should be aiming for 100% recycled, tree
farm and non-wood paper, non-wood paper could be used a lot lot more. 6000
years isn't long enough we should be aiming to keep our forests forever ! It
must be possibleâ€¦ why can't third world and developing countries get in on it,
I'm sure they have the land. It would do their economies wonders and it would
obviously be very good for the world. I think we should.

  1. Segun says:

October 4, 2012 at 10:06 am

Thank you for the incisive information. I just cited your work in my Master's
thesis

  1. Anon Hippie says:

October 24, 2012 at 2:49 pm

Is this the Onion? April 1st? Wait you're seriousâ€¦

"Plus, according to a 1996 report from the U.S. Forest Service, the rate of
harvest for softwood trees in the southern United States outpaced growth for
the first time since 1953."  
So  
for 43 years we had a surplus of trees and to make up for that you need  
a deficient of trees. Otherwise our tree farms would cover more and  
more area until it consumed the entire universe. Joking aside, sources  
from 15 years ago, at the time of the article, aren't a valid way to  
imply that we are running out of resources.

"For these reasons, there is a growing chorus of entrepreneurs,  
environmentalists and inventors who are coming up with ways to make  
paper without having to use as many chemicals or so many trees."  
So you're saying recycling uses a lot of chemicals and we're "working on
that".

"Hemp is a wood substitute that has a rich history in the papermaking [sic]
industryâ€¦"  
Key  
word "history", hemp can only be imported from other countries as it is  
illegal to grow in the US. Well that's environmentally friendly.

You  
forgot to mention that recycling paper costs more than using trees.  
Recycling paper is only profitable because of government subsidies.

Save  
the environment and economy buy reams non-recycled paper and put them  
in a landfill. (I'm not actually serious about that because the hippie  
in me would die a little.)

  1. Ellie says:

March 12, 2014 at 2:32 pm

Where did you get this statistic?

"World consumption of paper has grown 400 percent in the last 40 years. Now
nearly 4 billion trees or 35 percent of the total trees cut around the world
are used in paper industries on every continent."

  1. pfffff says:

May 23, 2014 at 1:07 pm

lmao we get it. the ozone is decaying! jesus u just got your fingers sore for
nothing there buddy

  1. Zip says:

July 11, 2014 at 1:02 pm

Stop killing the environment! This will probabily be the only planet we are
going to get.

  1. The Girl says:

July 31, 2014 at 1:29 pm

Such useful information

  1. Derphooves says:

November 18, 2014 at 8:25 pm

screw you noob this is science

  1. livlivinlife says:

November 23, 2014 at 6:18 pm

Ughhhh this is not aNswering my question :l

  1. cnkenafseed says:

February 12, 2015 at 3:58 am

Hello.At present our Farm have totally 25 tons of Kenaf seeds stock looking
for sell at this season .

Welcome to visit us and the seed variety is 8234 and welcome to response to me
at [email protected] for more information .

Looking to build relationship soon .  
Thanks

    
    
    * mrswagenstine says:
    

April 23, 2015 at 5:39 am

wat do u mean by relationship?

  1. Peter Hartman says:

July 4, 2015 at 8:08 am

It always amazes me when I read comments from such uneducated people. The pulp
industry plants new trees. They don't just cut them down and leave like the
uneducated expect. They farm the land just like a wheat farmer does. The trees
are a completely renewable resourceâ€¦UNLIKE OIL. I'd like to see the tree-
huggers walking to work every day. Just silliness. This article is great.
Thanks.

  1. Rylin Mariel says:

December 14, 2015 at 12:42 am

I'd like to know, what the percentages are as far as what paper goes to
newspapers, what paper goes to paper towels, etc

### Related Articles

  * How Many Trees Are There?

  * Predicting Forest Mortality

  * The Wealth of Forests

  * Fall Leaves - 'Leave' Them Alone

  * Arboreal - Lori Pond Photography

  * The Unknown Impact of Typhoon Haiyan

### EARTH

![](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/rightbar-

earth.jpg)

#### Recent Posts

  * Down to Earth: The Emerging Field of Planetary Health

  * Santa Fe National Forest Spared From Fracking

  * The Hopeful Work of Turning Appalachiaâ€™s Mountaintop Coal Mines Into Farms

  * Heavily Used Pesticide Linked to Breathing Problems in Farmworkersâ€™ Children

  * The Value of Nature

## ET NEWS

![](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/et-rsidebar-et-

news-feat-img.png)

#### Latest News

  * 'Coming Mass Extinction' Caused by Human Destruction Could Wipe Out 1 Million Species, Warns UN Draft Repo...

  * 'A World Without Clouds. Think About That a Minute': New Study Details Possibility of Devastating Climate ...

  * Scientists Warn Crashing Insect Population Puts 'Planet's Ecosystems and Survival of Mankind' at Risk

  * Humanity 'Sleepwalking Towards the Edge of a Cliff': 60% of Earth's Wildlife Wiped Out Since 1970

  * 'Warning Bells Going Off' as NOAA Forecasts Entire Great Barrier Reef at Risk of Coral Bleaching and Death

![](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/ECN-

banner-190px.jpg)

  * EARTH
  * AIR
  * ENERGY
  * WATER
  * HUMANS
  * SPECIES

  * ecoView

  * Inner Ecology
  * Planting for the Planet
  * ecoArts
  * ecoTipping
  * Ecology Kids

  * ECOLOGY TODAY

  * Ecology Campus
  * Shop Ecology

  * Resources

  * About
  * Contact
  * Terms of Use

  * Connect with us!

  *     * ![RSS News Feed](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/footer-rss-button.png)
    * ![Twitter](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/footer-twitter-button.png)
    * ![Facebook Button](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/footer-facebook-button.png)
    * ![Google Plus](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/footer-g-plus-button.png)
  * ![Ecology](https://www.ecology.com/wp-content/themes/ecology/images/footer-logo.png)

(C) 2010-2019 Ecology Communications Group, Inc. (ECG). All rights reserved.
ecology.com is owned and published by ECG.

The Ecology Global Network Â®, Ecology Radio Â®, Ecology Campus Network Â® and
their related logos and tagline are trademarks of ECG. All Rights Reserved.

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-32RZwbdtbgMjE.gif)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

