

You may be trying to access this site from a secured browser on the server.
Please enable scripts and reload this page.

Turn on more accessible mode

Turn off more accessible mode

Skip Ribbon Commands

Skip to main content

Turn off Animations

Turn on Animations

![](/_catalogs/masterpage/Assets/images/btn-language.png) Our Sponsors

Log in | Register

![HealthyChildren.org](/_layouts/15/AAP.HealthyChildren/images/healthy-

children-logo.gif) ![](/_layouts/15/AAP.HealthyChildren/images/healthy-

children-logo.gif)

Menu

Log in | Register

Home

Our Sponsors

  * Ages & StagesAges & Stages

    * Ages and Stages

    * Prenatal

    * Baby (0-12 mos.)
    * Toddler 1-3yrs.
    * Preschool 3-5yrs
    * Grade School 5-12yrs.
    * Teen 12-18yrs.
    * Young Adult 18-21yrs.
  * Healthy LivingHealthy Living

    * Healthy Living

    * Nutrition

    * Fitness
    * Sports
    * Oral Health
    * Emotional Wellness
    * Growing Healthy
    * Sleep
  * Safety & PreventionSafety & Prevention

    * Safety and Prevention

    * Immunizations

    * At Home
    * At Play
    * On The Go
    * All Around
  * Family LifeFamily Life

    * Family Life

    * Medical Home

    * Family Dynamics
    * Media
    * Work & Play
    * Getting Involved in Your Community
  * Health IssuesHealth Issues

    * Health Issues

    * Conditions

    * Injuries & Emergencies
    * Vaccine Preventable Diseases
  * NewsNews

  * Tips & ToolsTips & Tools

    * Tips and Tools

    * Ask The Pediatrician

    * Find a Pediatrician
    * Newsletters
    * Symptom Checker
    * Apps
    * E-Magazine
    * Webinars
  * Our MissionOur Mission

    * Our Mission

    * AAP in Action

    * Medical Editor & Contributors
    * Sponsors
    * Sponsorship Opportunities
    * Spread the Word
  * Shop AAP

Find a Pediatrician

##### Ages & Stages

## | Prenatal

## | Baby

## | | Bathing & Skin Care

## | Breastfeeding

## | Crying & Colic

## | Diapers & Clothing

## | Formula Feeding

## | Nutrition

## | Preemie

## | Sleep

## | Teething & Tooth Care

## | Toddler

## | Preschool

## | Gradeschool

## | Teen

## | Young Adult

![](https://www.healthychildren.org/SiteCollectionImagesArticleImages/motordelay_housead.jpg)

Healthy Children > Ages & Stages > Baby > First Month: Physical Appearance and
Growth

Ages & Stages

Listen

Español

Text Size

  * Email
  * Print
  * Share

![Facebook](/_catalogs/masterpage/assets/images/share-facebook.png)
![Twitter](/_catalogs/masterpage/assets/images/share-twitter.png) ![Google

+](/_catalogs/masterpage/assets/images/share-google.png)
![Pinterest](/_catalogs/masterpage/assets/images/share-pinterest.png)

# First Month: Physical Appearance and Growth

![](/SiteCollectionImages/cute_baby.jpg)
![](/SiteCollectionImages/cute_baby.jpg)

Page Content

Article Body

When your baby was born, her birth weight included excess body fluid, which
she lost during her first few days.

Most babies lose about one-tenth of their birth weight during the first five
days, then regain it over the next five, so that by about day ten they usually
are back to their original birth weight. Most babies grow very rapidly after
regaining their birth weight, especially during growth spurts, which occur
around seven to ten days and again between three and six weeks. The average
newborn gains weight at a rate of 2⁄3 of an ounce (20–30 grams) per day and by
one month weighs about ten pounds (4.5 kg). She grows between 1 1⁄2 and 2
inches (4.5 to 5 cm) during this month. Boys tend to weigh slightly more than
girls (by less than 1 pound, or approximately 350 grams). They also tend to be
slightly longer than girls at this age (by about 1⁄2 inch, or 1.25 cm).

Your pediatrician will pay particular attention to your child’s head growth,
because it reflects the growth of her brain. The bones in your baby’s skull
are still growing together, and the skull is growing faster during the first
four months than at any other time in her life. The average newborn’s head
circumference measures about 13 3⁄4 inches (35 cm), growing to about 15 inches
(38 cm) by one month. Because boys tend to be slightly larger than girls,
their heads are larger, though the average difference is less than 1⁄2 inch (1
cm).

During these first weeks your baby’s body gradually will straighten from the
tightly curled position she held inside the uterus during the final months of
pregnancy. She’ll begin to stretch her arms and legs and may arch her back
from time to time. Her legs and feet may continue to rotate inward, giving her
a bowlegged look. This condition usually will correct itself gradually over
the first year of life. If the bowlegged appearance is particularly severe or
associated with pronounced curving of the front part of the foot, your
pediatrician may suggest a splint or a cast to correct it, but in most
instances these circumstances are extremely unusual.

If your baby was born vaginally and her skull appeared misshapen at birth, it
soon should resume its normal shape. Any bruising of the scalp or swelling of
the eyelids that occurred during birth will be gone by the end of the first
week or two. Any red spots in the eyes will disappear in about three weeks.

To your dismay, you may discover that the fine hair that covered your child’s
head when she was born soon begins falling out. If she rubs the back of her
head on her sleep surface, she may develop a temporary bald spot there, even
if the rest of her hair remains. This loss is not medically significant. The
bare spots will be covered with new hair in a few months.

Another normal development is baby acne—pimples that break out on the face,
usually during the fourth or fifth week of life. They are thought to be due to
stimulation of oil glands in the skin by hormones passed across the placenta
during pregnancy. This condition may be made worse if the baby lies in sheets
laundered in harsh detergents or soiled by milk that she’s spit up. If your
baby does have baby acne, place a soft, clean receiving blanket under her head
while she’s awake and wash her face gently once a day with a mild baby soap to
remove milk or detergent residue.

Your newborn’s skin also may look blotchy, ranging in color from pink to blue.
Her hands and feet in particular may be colder and bluer than the rest of her
body. The blood vessels leading to these areas are more sensitive to
temperature changes and tend to shrink in response to cold. As a result, less
blood gets to the exposed skin, causing it to look pale or bluish. If you move
her arms and legs, however, you should notice that they quickly turn pink
again.

Your baby’s internal “thermostat,” which causes her to sweat when she’s too
hot or shiver when she’s too cold, won’t be working properly for some time.
Also, in these early weeks, she’ll lack the insulating layer of fat that will
protect her from sudden temperature shifts later on. For these reasons, it’s
important for you to dress her properly—warmly in cool weather and lightly
when it’s hot. A general rule of thumb is to dress her in one more layer of
clothing than _you_ would wear in the same weather conditions. Don’t
automatically bundle her up just because she’s a baby.

Between ten days and three weeks after birth, the stump from the umbilical
cord should have dried and fallen off, leaving behind a clean, well-healed
area. Occasionally a raw spot is left after the stump is gone. It may even
ooze a little blood-tinged fluid. Just keep it dry and clean (using a cotton
ball dipped in rubbing alcohol) and it will heal by itself. If it is not
completely healed and dry in two weeks, consult your pediatrician.

Last Updated

    
    
    8/1/2009
    

Source

    
    
    Caring for Your Baby and Young Child: Birth to Age 5 (Copyright © 2009 American Academy of Pediatrics)
    

The information contained on this Web site should not be used as a substitute
for the medical care and advice of your pediatrician. There may be variations
in treatment that your pediatrician may recommend based on individual facts
and circumstances.

  * Email
  * Print
  * Share

![Facebook](/_catalogs/masterpage/assets/images/share-facebook.png)
![Twitter](/_catalogs/masterpage/assets/images/share-twitter.png) ![Google

+](/_catalogs/masterpage/assets/images/share-google.png)
![Pinterest](/_catalogs/masterpage/assets/images/share-pinterest.png)

Donate

  * Contact Us 
  * About Us 
  * Privacy Policy 
  * Terms of Use 
  * Editorial Policy 

![](/_catalogs/masterpage/Assets/images/btn-language.png)

![This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to

verify.](//www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct472278_s.gif) This site
complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information:  
verify here.

(C) Copyright 2019 American Academy of Pediatrics. All rights reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

