

Skip to main content

Google Tag Manager

Friday June 7, 2019 Log In Register Subscribe Need Help?

![Home](/sites/all/themes/jocresp/images/JOCcom-2019.svg)

  * Subscribe - Save 25%
  * Magazine Archive
  * Newsletter Sign Up

Search

Search

  * Events
  * Maritime 
    * Container Lines
    * International Freight Shipping
    * Trade Lanes
    * Ships & Shipbuilding
  * Trucking 
    * LTL Shipping
    * Truckload Freight
    * Trucking Freight Brokers
    * Labor
    * Trucking Hours of Service
  * Ports 
    * US Ports
    * International Ports
    * Terminal Operators
    * Longshoreman Labor
    * Port Productivity
  * Logistics 
    * Distribution Centers
    * Logistics Technology
    * Industrial Real Estate
    * Logistics Providers
    * Air Cargo
  * Regulations 
    * Customs Regulations
    * Transportation Policy
    * Trade Policy
    * Transportation Regulations
    * Trade Data
    * Infrastructure News
    * Economy
  * Rail 
    * Class I Railroads
    * Short Lines and Regional Railroads
    * Intermodal Shipping
    * International Rail
    * Inland Ports
    * Labor
  * Technology
  * Breakbulk
  * Sailings
  * Special Topics

# Panama Canal expansion will affect shipping — but how?

JOC __Port News __Panama Canal News

# Panama Canal expansion will affect shipping — but how?

**Joseph Bonney, Senior Editor** | Jun 25, 2016 7:00AM EDT

Print

  * 

![](/sites/default/files/field_feature_image/panama%20canal%2030.jpg)

The Panama Canal with the new, larger locks at left. Credit: Panama Canal
Authority.

Nine years and $5.4 billion in the making, the Panama Canal’s new, larger
locks are opening amid questions about the impact they’ll have on an uncertain
global trade and container shipping environment.

The biggest questions involve trade between Asia and the U.S. East and Gulf
coasts, where ports have invested tens of billions of dollars in dredging and
other investments aimed at cutting into the West Coast’s dominant trans-
Pacific market share.

East and Gulf ports have been nibbling away at the West Coast’s market share,
and hope the Panama Canal’s added capacity will accelerate their momentum.
During the nine months ending in March 2016, their market share inched up to
33.9 percent, from 29.1 percent two years earlier, according to PIERS, a
sister product of JOC.com within IHS.

The canal’s new locks will open Sunday, June 26, when the Cosco Shipping
Panama, with a capacity of 9,443 twenty-foot-equivalent units, will make the
first commercial passage. The expansion project was completed this spring, two
years behind the original target of the 100th anniversary of the canal’s
opening in 1914.

The new locks measure 1,200 feet by 160 feet and will accommodate container
ships that carry up to about 13,000 TEUs, depending on the design, and that
draw up to 50 feet of water. That’s nearly triple the 4,500-to-5,000-TEU
capacity of current Panamax vessels using the century-old, 1,000-by-110-foot
locks, which have a maximum draft of 39.5 feet.

The canal expansion is the product of years of studies, notably a tripartite
report that the U.S., Japan and Panama funded in the 1980s. Construction began
in 2007 and has been punctuated by controversy involving repeated delays, a
messy dispute over construction overruns, and the 11th-hour discovery of
concrete flaws that pushed back the opening. Dry weather from the current El
Niño weather pattern has renewed questions about draft restrictions.

But by any standard, the expansion is a monumental project that will affect
global transportation for decades, as the existing canal has done. Even before
the new locks open, the project already is influencing industry decisions
about routes, rates, capacity and more.

**The industry reacts**

Anticipating a surge in trans-Pacific container shipments that now move via
the U.S. West Coast, East and Gulf coast ports have spent more than $150
billion to deepen harbors, expand terminals and improve rail and road
connections from their docks.

Carriers have begun upsizing Asia-East Coast services to take advantage of the
new locks. Six vessel strings — four from the CKYHE Alliance and two from the
G6 Alliance — have announced enhanced Asia-U.S. East Coast services using more
than 50 ships with capacities of 6,000 TEUs to 10,000 TEUs.

These ships replace nine current strings, eight of which use Panamax ships.
Separately, Mediterranean Shipping Co. has replaced Panamax ships with
8,000-TEU to 9,000-TEU ships on a Europe-West Coast South America route
through the canal. The 2M Alliance of Maersk and MSC plans to shift one of its
Asia-East Coast services that use the Suez to Panama.

Many consultants and industrial real estate developers predict the canal
expansion will accelerate a gradual shift of U.S. containerized imports from
Asia, now dominated by West Coast ports, toward the East and Gulf coasts.

The canal expansion “marks a fundamental shift in the shipment of Asian goods
to the Eastern U.S.” said David Egan, head of industrial research in the
Americas for real estate firm CBRE. “The short term won’t bring massive, game-
changing gains for East Coast ports, because much of that repositioning
already occurred in recent years,” Egan said. “But it will shift U.S. cargo
from slightly favoring the West Coast to a more even split between the two
coasts.”

East and Gulf coast ports expanded their share of containerized cargo during
severe West Coast congestion during International Longshore and Warehouse
Union contract negotiations in late 2014 and early 2015, and retained some of
the increase.

**What will determine the overall impact?**

All ports, however, may not see the containerized cargo growth they were
counting on to justify their investments in dredging and terminals. In
deciding on East versus West routings, shippers will also factor in transit
times, the costs of canal tolls in comparison with intermodal rail, port
reliability and distribution strategies.

“Just because you have a larger set of locks and larger ships through Panama
doesn’t mean you’re going to have a huge increase in business,” said Richard
Wainio, a consultant and former Port of Tampa executive director and former
chief economist at the Panama Canal. “It all comes down to the market.”

Walter Kemmsies, managing director for the U.S. ports, airports and global
infrastructure group at real estate company JLL, said shippers could enjoy
lower costs because of bigger ships’ economies of scale, but that this won’t
automatically translate to a big shift in cargo from the West Coast.

An “x-factor,” he said, will be the degree to which West Coast port operators
and western railroads adjust their rates to meet Panama’s competition. “There
could be a long competitive battle ahead,” Kemmsies said.

Another question is trade volume. Growth in U.S. containerized imports has
slowed from the heady years before the recession, when China’s manufacturing
exports expanded rapidly and traditional breakbulk cargoes were shifting to
containers and inflating growth in box volume.

Mario Moreno, chief economist at IHS Maritime & Trade, forecasts U.S.
containerized imports this year will rise 5.7 percent, to 20.9 million TEUs,
while exports increase 1.3 percent, to 11.6 million TEUs.

Wainio expects containerized volume growth to remain modest. “I don’t see huge
growth in container business on the primary routes the canal serves, namely
the bread-and-butter route from North Asia to the East Coast of the United
States,” he told JOC.com. He expects Panama will skim off marginal cargo from
West Coast intermodal routes and regain some business lost in recent years to
the sea-level Suez Canal, but that the overall pie will expand slowly.

But that doesn’t mean the canal authority erred in adding a third set of
locks, Waino emphasized.

“Has it made business sense for Panama to do what they’ve done in expanding
the canal? Yes, for a couple of reasons,” he said. “They needed more capacity,
because with only two lanes, if you take one out of service for maintenance,
you have backups. And if you’re going to add a third lane, it was a no-brainer
to make it larger, in order to handle the larger ships.”

Since the expansion began, carriers have built dozens of container ships with
capacities of up to 20,000 TEUs — too large to fit through the new locks.
Those ships will continue to use the sea-level Suez Canal on Asia-Europe
routes.

Panama officials are making a strong bid for ships that will fit through the
new locks but now use the Suez. After ratcheting up tolls for several years,
the Panama Canal Authority has offered container lines an incentive plan based
on ships’ volume.

To counter increased competition from Panama, Suez Canal officials are
offering increased rebates to encourage container ships that now use the Cape
of Good Hope in order to avoid Suez tolls and take advantage of low fuel costs
on backhaul routes to Asia.

Transit time for a direct voyage from Hong Kong to New York is the same,
although actual times depend on port coverage and intermediate stops. Panama
has an advantage for origin points north of Hong Kong.

Consultant Chaim Shacham, a former Zim Integrated Shipping Services executive,
has estimated that based on recent fuel prices and tolls at the start of the
year, carriers’ average per-TEU round-trip costs on a Panamax sailing would be
$1,150 to $1,175 per TEU via Panama and $1,210 to $1,185 via the Suez, but
that Panama’s roundtrip cost for an 8,000-TEU ship will drop to about $850 per
TEU.

Container lines need all the help they can get. Industry analysts say the
carriers’ losses could hit $10 billion this year because of overcapacity that
has dropped rates to record lows. Carriers have struggled to fill big super-
sized ships they ordered in a bid for economies of scale. This makes it
uncertain whether carriers’ cost savings from bigger ships using the canal
will be passed to shippers.

The Panama expansion will provide additional routes for deployment of those
big ships, but is bad news for owners of traditional Panamax vessels. Many of
which will be laid up or scrapped, especially those with long, narrow hulls
that fit the older locks’ dimensions but require extra ballast that’s needed
for stability and cuts into cargo deadweight capacity.

All but overlooked amid talk about the higher-capacity new locks have been
draft restrictions that at least initially will prevent neo-Panamax vessels
from using the new locks’ full 50-foot draft.

In recent months, dry weather from the El Niño weather phenomenon has forced
the Panama Canal Authority to impose draft restrictions in response to lowered
water levels at the reservoirs that feed canal locks. The canal authority
recently restored drafts at its existing locks to their maximum 39.5 feet.
When the new locks open, they initially will provide drafts of up to only 43
feet (13.11 meters), well below the maximum 50 feet (15.2 meters). Canal
officials say they expect water levels to be sufficient to meet long-term
demand.

**To benefit, ports have more work to do**

Despite billions of dollars spent on deeper channels and new and expanded
terminals, the East and Gulf coasts still aren’t fully prepared to handle a
surge of neo-Panamax ships. Terminals in ports such as New York-New Jersey and
Virginia have struggled with congestion, especially when large ships arrive in
bunches off schedule.

For the next couple of years, the biggest constraint on the size of ships
using the Panama Canal to reach the U.S. East Coast will be the 151-foot
clearance under the Bayonne Bridge, which stands between four new York-New
Jersey container terminals and the Atlantic.

Expected completion of a $1.3 billion project to raise the bridge to 215 feet
has been pushed back to the end of 2017 by construction delays. Because New
York-New Jersey’s concentrated consumer import demand makes the port a must-
call stop for most all-water services to the East Coast, most ships in the
route are sized to fit under the bridge. In recent years, several carriers
have installed lower exhaust stacks or collapsible antennas under “Bayonne-
max” vessels, but that’s only a stopgap move.

During the last decade, New York-New Jersey, Baltimore and Miami have deepened
their channels to 50 feet, joining Virginia as East Coast ports with channels
deep enough for fully loaded neo-Panamax vessels. Savannah is deepening its
channel to 47 feet, and Charleston is on track to have 52-foot depth within
five years. Houston’s container terminals now have 45-foot depths.

Other ports such as Jacksonville and Port Everglades, Florida, also are
seeking authorization or funding to deepen their channels. Multimillion-dollar
terminal expansions and upgrades are under way at other ports, even smaller
ones that don’t currently handle Panamax vessels.

At Gulfport, Mississippi, the state-owned port authority has sunk $30 million
into three new cranes that can span 18 rows of containers, even though the
port’s current users don’t even operate 13-across Panamax ships and the port’s
channel is only 36 feet deep.

Not all of the port projects will produce a positive return, Wainio warned. He
said the need for deeper channels has been overemphasized. “I’ve said all
along that we don’t need 50 feet of water at most ports, even with the new
locks at the canal,” he said.

Wainio expects 8,000-TEU to 10,000-TEU ships to be the “workhorses” of all-
water canal services to the U.S. East and Gulf coasts. Even larger neo-Panamax
ships won’t arrive at ports at full capacity, and won’t need drafts to match
the locks’ operating draft, Wainio said.

“With new ship designs, a 9,000-TEU ship might draw only 40 or 42 feet,” he
said. “Channel length, width, turning basins and road and rail connections are
more important than having 50 feet of water.”

Panamanian officials are promoting the isthmus as a transshipment hub where
large vessels can exchange cargo with smaller regional vessels to support
distribution and light assembly. The canal has authority has authorized
construction of a 3 million-TEU-per-year transshipment hub with 60-foot water
depth at Corozal, at the canal’s Pacific entrance.

Other terminal operators in the region have warned that the region’s
transshipment capacity is on its way to being overbuilt. Asaf Ashar, professor
emeritus at the University of New Orleans’ National Port and Waterways
Institute, has questioned assumptions that the expanded canal will produce
double-digit growth in transshipments.

Ashar predicted transshipment will grow at a slower rate, and that much of the
increase will be at non-Panamanian ports such as Cartagena, Colombia. He said
that instead of transshipping, carriers are more likely to combine smaller
services into direct services that use larger, more efficient ships.

_Contact Joseph Bonney atjoseph.bonney@ihs.com and follow him on Twitter:
@JosephBonney._

Port News ›Panama Canal News

Breakbulk

International Logistics

Maritime News›Container Lines

Maritime News›Ships & Shipbuilding

Maritime News›Trade Lanes›Trans-Pacific

## Log In

E-mail *

Password *

Forgot your password?

Remember me on this computer

  * Create new account
  * Request new password

Log in

## Subscribe

Subscribe Now

## Register

Register with JOC.com and read up to **FIVE** articles every thirty days. You
can also subscribe to our daily newsletter.

Register

Port News ›Panama Canal News

Breakbulk

International Logistics

Maritime News›Container Lines

Maritime News›Ships & Shipbuilding

Maritime News›Trade Lanes›Trans-Pacific

## More on JOC

![](https://www.joc.com/sites/default/files/styles/120x80/public/field_feature_image/LongBeach.png?itok=PVIj1m4R)

Automation, appointments lowering truck turn times at USWC ports

US Ports

![](https://www.joc.com/sites/default/files/styles/120x80/public/field_feature_image/foodstuffs.png?itok=wU1gBNQM)

Tariffs shift sourcing, but food and drink shippers keep evolving

International Logistics

![](https://www.joc.com/sites/default/files/styles/120x80/public/field_feature_image/PortofVancouvercontainers.png?itok=piPlF2q8)

Port fluidity seen in Canada cargo portal plan

Halifax Port Authority

![](https://www.joc.com/sites/default/files/styles/120x80/public/field_feature_image/landstar%20truck%20700x467.jpg?itok=MTPSJHhC)

Truckload rates, demand struggling in Q2

Landstar System

![](https://www.joc.com/sites/default/files/styles/120x80/public/field_feature_image/IlyushinHeavy%2BIl-96-400.jpg?itok=kBfe1z_2)

Ilyushin plans new heavy-cargo air freighter

Air Cargo Equipment

![](https://www.joc.com/sites/default/files/styles/120x80/public/field_feature_image/Logistics.png?itok=eJIdEZ36)

Digitalization: Logistics providers invest — and hope for the best

Logistics Providers

![](https://www.joc.com/sites/default/files/styles/120x80/public/field_feature_image/ForBechtel.png?itok=0_3B2INS)

Q&A;: Stephen Spoljaric, Global Manager of Logistics, Bechtel

Logistics Providers

More News & Analysis

## Webcasts

US-Mexico Trade: A New Era Takes Shape for Importers and Exporters

May 30, 2019 2:00PM EDT

The JOC Top 100 Importers: Analyzing the Rankings

Jun 20, 2019 2:00PM EDT

The JOC Top 100 Exporters: Analyzing the Rankings

Jun 27, 2019 2:00PM EDT

More Webcasts

## White Papers

![](https://www.joc.com/sites/default/files/styles/90x60/public/AmberRoad%20250px.jpg?itok=KuUJ1EOg)

Creating the Global Supply Chain Control Tower : Beyond Simple Visibility

![](https://www.joc.com/sites/default/files/styles/90x60/public/CHR_LogoTM_Horz_2C_wTagline_RGB_0.png?itok=2ZzNHDuc)

Biggest, Fastest, Savings for Global Supply Chains

![](https://www.joc.com/sites/default/files/styles/90x60/public/Seabury-

Logo_0.png?itok=kOSdRvkj)

IMO 2020: What Every Shipper Need to Know

More Whitepapers

## Podcasts

2018 Annual Review & Outlook: Rail Perspective

Emergency Management at Corpus Christi

East Coast Supporting Investment By Long Beach

More Podcasts

## Port News

  * **Longshoreman Labor**
  * **Panama Canal News**
  * **International Ports**
  * **Asian Ports**
  * **Dredging**
  * **European Ports**
  * **Port Equipment**
  * **Port Data & Services**
  * **Port Productivity**
  * **South American Ports**
  * **Terminal Operators**
  * **US Ports**

  * Get More JOC

    * Subscribe
    * Register Free
    * Newsletters
    * Group Subscriptions
  * Marketing Services
    * Advertise
    * Editorial Calendar
    * Editorial Staff
    * Commentary
  * Tools and Resources
    * White Papers
    * Webcasts
    * Podcasts
    * Pricing Hub
    * Sailings Schedules
    * Videos
    * Magazine Archive
    * Port Productivity Report
  * Related Sites
    * IHS Markit
    * JOC Events
    * Dredging and Port Construction
    * PocketList.com
    * Safety at Sea

![Home](/sites/all/themes/jocresp/images/JOCcom-2019-wh.svg)

* * *

  * Contact Us
  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms & Conditions
  * Copyright

    * __HOME
    * __Main Navigation
    * __Events
    * __Maritime
    * __Container Lines
    * __International Freight Shipping
    * __Trade Lanes
    * __Ships & Shipbuilding
    * __Trucking
    * __LTL Shipping
    * __Truckload Freight
    * __Trucking Freight Brokers
    * __Labor
    * __Trucking Hours of Service
    * __Ports
    * __US Ports
    * __International Ports
    * __Terminal Operators
    * __Longshoreman Labor
    * __Port Productivity
    * __Logistics
    * __Distribution Centers
    * __Logistics Technology
    * __Industrial Real Estate
    * __Logistics Providers
    * __Air Cargo
    * __Regulations
    * __Customs Regulations
    * __Transportation Policy
    * __Trade Policy
    * __Transportation Regulations
    * __Trade Data
    * __Infrastructure News
    * __Economy
    * __Rail
    * __Class I Railroads
    * __Short Lines and Regional Railroads
    * __Intermodal Shipping
    * __International Rail
    * __Inland Ports
    * __Labor
    * __Technology
    * __Breakbulk
    * __Sailings
    * __Special Topics
    * __More on JOC.com
    * __Subscribe - Save 25%
    * __Magazine Archive
    * __Newsletter Sign Up

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

