

Asset 5arrow-downarrow-leftarrow-rightarrow-uparticleAsset 31Asset 2Asset
7Asset 6Asset 7Asset 15Asset 16cartAsset 51cart-filledAsset 52checkAsset
50Asset 3chevron-upchevron-leftchevron-rightchevron-upclosecomment-newcomment-
filledAsset 11double-caret-downdouble-chevron-downAsset 55double-chevron-
upAsset 56email-newemail-filledAsset 14Asset 2fullscreen-closefullscreen-
opengallerygallery-filledAsset 15GlobegridAsset 17grid-filledAsset
18headphones-newheadphones-filledAsset 19heart-filledheart-
openinteractiveAsset 73linkAsset 48loadingAsset 45Artboard 1minusmutedAsset
29muted-filledAsset 30ng-borderAsset 8pauseAsset 40pause-filledAsset 39Asset
12Asset 13playAsset 33play-filledAsset
32plusNG_AD_Iconography_111317_JY_v2Asset 3replayAsset 11Asset 10Asset
4SearchIconshareAsset 34facebookgithubArtboard 1Artboard
1linkedinlinkedin_inpinterestpinterest_psnapchatsnapchat_2twitterwhatsappspeakerAsset
27speaker-filledAsset 28star-filledstar-opentextAsset 43text-filledAsset
42tiltAsset 58Asset 8Asset 9Asset 4userAsset 53user-filledvideo-cameraAsset
35video-camera-filledAsset 36volumeAsset 25volume-filledAsset 26

![](/etc/designs/platform/v2/images/logos/ng-black-

logo.ngsversion.5ce5f96b.png)
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/global-warming/global-warming-
effects.html

(C) 1996-2015 National Geographic Society, (C) 2015- 2019 National Geographic
Partners, LLC. All rights reserved

* * *

Reference

# Effects of global warming

##

The signs of global warming are everywhere, and are more complex than just
climbing temperatures.

CAUSES AND EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

What causes climate change? And how does it relate to global warming? Learn
about the impact and consequences of climate change and global warming for the
environment and our lives.

Reference

# Effects of global warming

##

The signs of global warming are everywhere, and are more complex than just
climbing temperatures.

CAUSES AND EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

What causes climate change? And how does it relate to global warming? Learn
about the impact and consequences of climate change and global warming for the
environment and our lives.

2 Minute Read

* * *

* * *

The planet is warming, from North Pole to South Pole. Since 1906, the global
average surface temperature has increased by more than 1.6 degrees Fahrenheit
(0.9 degrees Celsius)—even more in sensitive polar regions. And the impacts of
rising temperatures aren’t waiting for some far-flung future–the effects of
global warming are appearing right now. The heat is melting glaciers and sea
ice, shifting precipitation patterns, and setting animals on the move.

Many people think of global warming and climate change as synonyms, but
scientists prefer to use “climate change” when describing the complex shifts
now affecting our planet’s weather and climate systems. Climate change
encompasses not only rising average temperatures but also extreme weather
events, shifting wildlife populations and habitats, rising seas, and a range
of other impacts. All of these changes are emerging as humans continue to add
heat-trapping greenhouse gases to the atmosphere.

Scientists already have documented these impacts of climate change:

  * Ice is melting worldwide, especially at the Earth’s poles. This includes mountain glaciers, ice sheets covering West Antarctica and Greenland, and Arctic sea ice. In Montana's Glacier National Park the number of glaciers has declined to fewer than 30 from more than 150 in 1910.
  * Much of this melting ice contributes to sea-level rise. Global sea levels are rising 0.13 inches (3.2 millimeters) a year, and the rise is occurring at a faster rate in recent years.
  * Rising temperatures are affecting wildlife and their habitats. Vanishing ice has challenged species such as the Adelie penguin in Antarctica, where some populations on the western peninsula have collapsed by 90 percent or more.
  * As temperatures change, many species are on the move. Some butterflies, foxes, and alpine plants have migrated farther north or to higher, cooler areas.
  * Precipitation (rain and snowfall) has increased across the globe, on average. Yet some regions are experiencing more severe drought, increasing the risk of wildfires, lost crops, and drinking water shortages.
  * Some species—including mosquitoes, ticks, jellyfish, and crop pests—are thriving. Booming populations of bark beetles that feed on spruce and pine trees, for example, have devastated millions of forested acres in the U.S.

Other effects could take place later this century, if warming continues. These
include:

  * Sea levels are expected to rise between 10 and 32 inches (26 and 82 centimeters) or higher by the end of the century.
  * Hurricanes and other storms are likely to become stronger. Floods and droughts will become more common. Large parts of the U.S., for example, face a higher risk of decades-long "megadroughts" by 2100.
  * Less freshwater will be available, since glaciers store about three-quarters of the world's freshwater.
  * Some diseases will spread, such as mosquito-borne malaria (and the 2016 resurgence of the Zika virus).
  * Ecosystems will continue to change: Some species will move farther north or become more successful; others, such as polar bears, won’t be able to adapt and could become extinct.

**Read next:** Is Global Warming Real?

Climate Change 101 with Bill Nye Climate Change is a real and serious issue.
In this video Bill Nye, the Science Guy, explains what causes climate change,
how it affects our planet, why we need to act promptly to mitigate its
effects, and how each of us can contribute to a solution.

Continue Reading

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

