

__

# MarketWatch site logo

  * Latest
  * Watchlist
  * Markets
  * Investing
  * Barron's
  * Economy
  * Personal Finance
  * Retirement
  * Video
  * Opinion

Sign Up • Log In

__ Search MarketWatch

  * Home
  * Latest News
  * Watchlist
  * Markets __

    * U.S. Markets
    * Canada
    * Europe & Middle East
    * Asia
    * Emerging Markets
    * Latin America
    * Market Data
  * Investing __

    * Barron's
    * Stocks
    * IPOs
    * Mutual Funds
    * ETFs
    * Options
    * Bonds
    * Commodities
    * Currencies
    * Cryptocurrencies
    * Futures
    * Financial Adviser Center
    * Cannabis
  * Barron's

  * Economy & Politics __

    * Capitol Report
    * Trump Today
    * Election 2020
    * The Federal Reserve
    * Economic Report
    * Rex Nutting
    * Brexit
    * U.S. Economic Calendar
    * Tax Withholding Calculator
  * Personal Finance __

    * The Moneyist
    * Spending & Saving
    * Retirement
    * Taxes
    * Credit Cards
    * Careers
    * Travel
    * Real Estate
    * Family Finance
    * Love & Money
    * Moneyish
  * Retirement __

    * Best New Ideas in Retirement
    * Estate Planning
    * FIRE
    * Taxes
    * Social Security
    * Real Estate
    * Retirement Planner
    * Where Should I Retire?
  * Virtual Stock Exchange

  * Video __

    * SectorWatch
    * The Moneyist
    * Getting to Work With
    * Love & Money
    * Explainomics
    * Good Company
  * Opinion

  * Premium Newsletters __

    * Retirement Weekly
    * The Technical Indicator
    * Revolution Investing
    * Options Trader
  * Research & Tools __

    * Watchlist
    * Stock Screener
    * Earnings Calendar
    * Market Screener
    * IPO Calendar
    * Premarket Screener
    * Options Calendar
    * After Hours Screener
    * Currency Tools
    * Mutual Fund Screener
    * Upgrades & Downgrades
    * Mutual Fund Comparison
    * CDs
    * Savings Accounts
    * Mortgage Rates
    * Where Should I Retire?
    * Retirement Planner

Sign Up Log In

  * Profile Settings
  * Watchlist
  * Email & Alerts
  * Games

  * Home

  * ## Personal Finance

# Climate change has cost the government $350 billion — here’s what it will

cost you

By Kari Paul

Published: Nov 26, 2018 10:18 a.m. ET

Share

facebook icon Twitter icon Linkedin icon Flipboard icon

Email icon

Comment icon

Text Resize Print icon

##

A report, authored by more than 300 experts, spells out a litany of impacts
linked to climate change

![](https://ei.marketwatch.com/Multimedia/2017/09/06/Photos/ZH/MW-

FT788_irma09_20170906180751_ZH.jpg?uuid=d36239d8-934f-11e7-8b6e-9c8e992d421e)
Reuters

Hurricane Irma slammed across islands in the northern Caribbean last year.

By

### Kari **Paul**

Our planet is warming, putting at risk not only our physical well-being, but
our wallets.

Last Friday, 13 federal agencies issued a major report stating that climate
change is a threat to Americans’ health and the country’s economic well-being.
The report, authored by more than 300 experts, spells out a litany of impacts
linked to climate change.

“Without substantial and sustained global mitigation and regional adaptation
efforts, climate change is expected to cause growing losses to American
infrastructure and property and impede the rate of economic growth over this
century,” wrote the authors of the Fourth National Climate Assessment Volume
II.

The 2018 Nobel Prize for Economics Science was awarded to William Nordhaus and
Paul Romer, two American economists whose work emphasizes the importance of
sustainable economic growth and an economic system that takes climate change
into account.

The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences said the two economists “have designed
methods for addressing some of our time’s most basic and pressing questions
about how we create long-term sustained and sustainable economic growth.”

Climate change has cost U.S. taxpayers more than $350 billion over the past
decade, according to a report released last year from nonpartisan federal
watchdog the Government Accountability Office. By 2050, that figure will be
$35 billion per year. Costs include clean up and disaster assistance from
flooding and storms, which are set to increase under rising temperatures.

Those estimates come as the planet experienced its hottest year on record in
2016, in which temperatures were 1.78 degrees Fahrenheit warmer than the mid-
century mean. Scientists say global temperatures may rise by 7 degrees
Fahrenheit before the end of the 21st century. As climate change escalates,
cities are building sea walls, seeking new water sources for drought-stricken
land, and storm-proofing their infrastructure in preparation.

But while impending environmental impact of rising temperatures may be the
most tangible, the often-overlooked effects on our pocketbooks may be just as
worrisome, according to David Stookey, author of the book “Climate-Proof Your
Personal Finances” published the Savvy Families Institute, an organization he
heads that is based in Rhode Island.

“The physical problems are going to affect relatively few people in America —
a much broader number are going to experience these problems financially,” he
said. “The physical risks are nothing compared with the financial risks.” For
this generation, at least.

A number of people, including President Donald Trump, challenge the concept of
climate change and whether it is caused by human activity, but more than 90%
of scientists agree it is real and human-caused.

The speed and degree to which climate change will affect us — and what we will
do to slow it — is not fully known, but we can begin taking measures now to
financially prepare.

###### 1. Re-evaluate your budget

Climate change will send food, energy, and water costs soaring, and savvy
consumers should adjust their home budgets accordingly, according to the
Brookings Institution, a research think tank in Washington, D.C. Incomes are
expected to shrink by 36% by 2100 due to climate change, and millennials will
bear the brunt of the economic effects.

Rising temperatures, the erosion of topsoil in farming states, and erratic
weather events are expected to drive food costs up between 3% and 84% by 2050.
Consider cutting back on resource-intensive food like beef and other animal
products as well as buying produce from local farms to keep costs down.

Impending water shortages can affect the costs of natural gas and even
sustainable energy in coming years. Consumers should weatherize their home to
decrease how much heat leaves in the winter and how much heat comes in during
the summer and switch to renewable energy sources like wind, says Stookey.
Face these potential financial troubles head on by making a budget that
accounts for a percentage rise in costs each year due to climate change —
Stookey’s website offers a sample template for the average family home.

A 21-year-old college student graduating in 2015 is expected to lose $126,000
in lifetime income due to climate change and the generation as a whole is
expected to lose $8.8 trillion in lifetime income, a study from environmental
advocacy organization NextGen Climate found. This decrease is due to a number
of climate change-related economic burdens including stagnant wages and lack
of well-paying jobs and potential recession.

###### 2. Straighten out your insurance

As climate change transforms our environment, it will raise a number of new
issues to take into account when choosing health insurance.

A large increase in pollen caused by warming planet could mean higher health
care costs for people with allergies and asthma. Ragweed pollen season is now
a month longer than it was in 1995 and sensitivity to ragweed expanded by 15%
in the past four years, according to Stookey’s research. Not all insurance
plans cover allergy tests and treatment. Though rarely fatal, the costs of
these medical conditions add up: allergy sufferers made more than 17 million
doctors visits a year and asthma currently costs $3,300 per person in medical
expenses annually, according to Stanford Medicine. New weather patterns could
result in more pathogens in city water, Stookey said, putting more people at
risk for disease.

Consumers may also want to opt for a health plan with generous mental health
benefits, as the American Psychological Association predicts that climate
disruption will cause a steady increase in mental health issues, including
depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, suicide, and addiction.

###### 3. Pick a climate-safe job

Changing weather will have major effects on a number of industries:
Agriculture will be damaged by drought and high temperatures and commercial
fishing will be negatively impacted by rising sea levels. (Although the latest
GAO report notes that climate change could actually improve crop yields in the
northern U.S.) While warming may shrink some industries, others will remain
stable or even experience a boost. College students and soon-to-be graduates
may want to choose a career path that is climate-proof.

Construction work is expected to take on hundreds of thousands of workers as
cities build sea walls and climate-proof housing, like Miami’s plans to
prevent flooding in the city and New York City’s post Hurricane Sandy
construction plans, which a recent study in the magazine Nature said was made
worse by climate change. For similar reasons, the real estate and moving
industry is expected to see more opportunity as people seek to relocate to
more climate-safe cities — even Trump recognized climate change in his plans
to build a sea wall around an Ireland golf course. Renewable energy resources
like solar and wind are expected to grow over time, especially if government
subsidies increase.

###### 4. Warming-proof your investments

While the economy is expected to suffer overall as a result of climate change,
according to a 2015 study from Nature, a U.K.-based academic journal, some
industries will stand to benefit from a warming climate. Coffee investors are
already seeing benefits, for example, and Stookey recommends in his book
purchasing mutual funds, exchange-traded funds and hedge funds that invest in
water companies. Clean energy, solar energy, and nuclear energy are also smart
investments in a warming planet, according to Stookey.

###### 5. Climate-proof your home

Most standard home insurance policies don’t cover flood damage, according to
the Insurance Information Institute, a nonprofit funded by the industry. The
home is the biggest investment for many people, and consumers should take
extra care to protect it from climate change — particularly if they live in a
flood zone. Check resources from Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
online to see if your home is in a flood zone and protect it accordingly.
Consumers can start by buying flood insurance and improving drainage systems
in their home. Homes can be built on stilts or surrounded by a waterproof
fence. Some homes are being built with the ability to float, so they are safe
when the tide rises, like in some parts of New Orleans affected by Hurricane
Katrina.

###### 6. Consider making a move

Many of these problems can be avoided for the most part by moving to a less
vulnerable or more climate-prepared city. There is no one city that is the
most climate change-proof, Stookey said, because they vary largely based on
individual needs. His website hosts a tool that grades towns based on various
climate-related factors, including water access, flooding and other natural
disaster risk, and economic safety nets for climate change issues. Another
tool from software developer Bert Sperling ranks cities in order of safety
from natural disasters.

The most important thing, Stookey said, is to adapt. “The effects of global
warming we feel are going to be highly local — one town could be completely
immune and its next door neighbor will be in serious trouble,” he said.
“People need to start planning for the risks.”

_This story was updated on Nov. 26, 2018._

**Also see:**

  * Is organic food really healthier?
  * Here’s what Democrats and Republicans agree on regarding climate change
  * These are the stocks for playing climate change

### We Want to **Hear from You**

Join the conversation

Comment

### MarketWatch **Partner Center**

  *     *       *         * 

### Most Popular

  * ![](https://s.marketwatch.com/public/resources/MWimages/MW-HK891_dow_25_MC_20190606044106.jpg)

Hop on now before Dow reaches 40,000, says forecaster who nailed 2018 selloff

  * ![](https://s.marketwatch.com/public/resources/MWimages/MW-FP147_17trum_MC_20170625165751.jpg)

Donald Trump’s ‘genius,’ explained in one economist’s tweet

  * ![](https://s.marketwatch.com/public/resources/MWimages/MW-HK808_firest_MC_20190605093343.jpg)

These early retirees bought their ‘disgusting’ house in Montana with cash and
budget less than $1 a pound for food

  * ![](https://s.marketwatch.com/public/resources/MWimages/MW-HH092_trump__MC_20190405133419.jpg)

Stop lying to me about Trump’s tariffs

  * ![](https://s.marketwatch.com/public/resources/MWimages/MW-GA898_blockc_MC_20171229131148.jpg)

Mortgage rates slump to 2-year low — but consumers may not bite

Community Guidelines • FAQs

BACK TO TOP

  * #### MarketWatch

  * Site Index

  * Topics
  * Help
  * Feedback
  * Newsroom Roster
  * Media Archive
  * Premium Products
  * Mobile

  * #### Company

  * Company Info

  * Code of Conduct
  * Corrections
  * Advertising Media Kit
  * Advertise Locally
  * Reprints & Licensing
  * Your Ad Choices
  *   * #### Dow Jones Network

  * WSJ.com

  * Barron's Online
  * BigCharts
  * Virtual Stock Exchange
  * Financial News London
  * WSJ.com Small Business
  * realtor.com
  * Mansion Global

![](https://sts3.wsj.net/bucket-a/foxtrot/public/images/backgrounds/mobile_devices.png)

Copyright (C) 2019 MarketWatch, Inc. All rights reserved.

By using this site you agree to the Terms of Service, Privacy Policy, and
Cookie Policy.

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Linkedin
  * Google Plus
  * ![](https://sts3.wsj.net/bucket-a/maggie/static/images/app-store.svg) ![-""](https://sts3.wsj.net/bucket-a/maggie/static/images/google-play.png)

Intraday Data provided by FACTSET and subject to terms of use. Historical and
current end-of-day data provided by FACTSET. All quotes are in local exchange
time. Real-time last sale data for U.S. stock quotes reflect trades reported
through Nasdaq only. Intraday data delayed at least 15 minutes or per exchange
requirements.

__

Advanced Search

### Stocks

### Columns

### Authors

### Topics

No results found

####

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

