

Skip to main content

# Union of Concerned Scientists

# ![Union of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-
ucs.png)

en español __

## Search form

Search

## Main Menu

  * Our Work
    * Clean Energy
    * Clean Vehicles
    * Food & Agriculture
    * Global Warming
    * Nuclear Power
    * Nuclear Weapons
    * Center for Science and Democracy
  * About
    * Accomplishments & History
    * Leadership & Experts
    * Funding & Financials
    * Ways to Give
    * News Center
    * Jobs at UCS
    * Contact Us
    * The UCS Store: Say It With Science!
  * Take Action
    * Science Network
  * Subscribe
  * Donate
    * Renew Your Membership
    * Become a Member
    * Give Monthly
    * Make a Planned Gift
    * More Ways to Give
    * Gifts in Honor or Memory
    * Gift Memberships
  * Science Network Leaders

**search**

## You are here

  1. Global Warming
  2. » Global Warming Science

# How Do We Know that Humans Are the Major Cause of Global Warming?

### Unprecedented warming

**En español:¿Cómo sabemos que la actividad humana es la principal causa del
cambio climático?**

Earth's surface has undergone unprecedented warming over the last century, and
especially in this century.

Every single year since 1977 has been warmer than the 20th century average,
with 16 of the 17 warmest years on record occurring since 2001, and 2016 being
the warmest year on recorded history. A study from 2016 found that without the
emissions from burning coal and oil, there is very little likelihood that 13
out of the 15 warmest years on record would all have happened.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/Human_fingerprints.jpg)

Human fingerprints.  
Image: IPCC AR5

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/07/Humantcontribution.jpg)

Click to enlarge.

IPCC AR5

As any farmer can tell, the natural patterns of climate have been altered.

We know that warming—and cooling—has happened in the past, and long before
humans were around. Many factors (called “climate drivers”) can influence
Earth’s climate—such as changes in the sun’s intensity and volcanic eruptions,
as well as heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere.

But, what’s causing today’s unprecedented warming — **are humans part of the
cause?**

Scientists have devised different methods to answer this question.
Meteorologists and oceanographers compare the climate patterns they observe
with patterns developed using sophisticated models of Earth's atmosphere and
ocean. By matching the observed and modeled patterns, scientists can
positively identify the "human fingerprints" associated with the changes, and
they can also attribute the proportion of those changes to human activities.

The fingerprints that humans have left on Earth's climate are turning up in a
diverse range of records and can be seen in the ocean, in the atmosphere, and
on the Earth’s surface.

Scientists agree that today’s warming is primarily caused by humans putting
too much carbon in the atmosphere, like when we choose to extract and burn
coal, oil, and gas, or cut down and burn forests.

Scientists have gathered evidence and have improved their methods for teasing
apart natural and human factors. Today scientists have very high confidence
about human-caused global average surface temperature increase – a key climate
indicator. They have reported on their growing confidence through successive
climate assessments of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).

### Direct evidence of human contribution to atmospheric CO2

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/07/400PMM4Eva_720_492_s_c1_c_c.jpg)

Carbon dioxide concentrations.  
Image: Climate Central

Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the main heat-trapping gas largely responsible for
most of the average warming over the past several decades.

The atmospheric concentration of CO2 has increased dramatically, from a pre-
industrial era (AD 1000 – 1750) concentration of approximately 280 parts per
million (ppm) to today's 400 ppm.

Scientists warned for years about this dangerous threshold, but with the
accelerated pace of emissions the question changed from whether we would reach
CO2 concentrations above 400ppm to when.

The Arctic reached 400 ppm in 2012. In 2013 the Mauna Loa Observatory in
Hawaii recorded more than 400ppm. In March 2015 global averages reached this
threshold, and in September 2016 the world reached a point of no-return: CO2
concentration levels are unlikely to dip below 400 ppm again.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/07/CO2_signature%20.jpg)

Click to enlarge. Direct Evidence of Fossil Fuel Derived CO2 in the
Atmosphere. While the concentration of carbon has increased, the carbon
originating from natural sources has decreased.

IPCC AR5

We know human activities are driving the increase in CO2 concentrations
because atmospheric CO2 contains information about its source. Scientists can
tease apart how much CO2 comes from natural sources, and how much comes from
combusted fossil fuel sources.

Compared to other carbon sources, carbon from fossil fuels has a distinctly
different “signature,” essentially the relative amount of heavier or lighter
atoms of carbon (technically δ13C). The more negative the δ13C, the higher the
proportion of carbon from fossil fuels.

Over the years, δ13C has decreased while the overall amount of CO2 has
increased. This information tells scientists that fossil fuel emissions are
the largest contributor of CO2 concentrations since the pre-industrial era.

### Natural and human factors that influence the climate (known as “climate

drivers”)

Many natural and human factors (also called drivers) influence the climate.

Emissions from cars and power plants and an increase in the amount of
radiation the sun emits are examples of "forcings" that drive temperature
rise, the first one by trapping heat, and the second one by increasing energy,
which translated into heat. Volcanic events and some types of human-made
pollution, both of which inject sunlight-reflecting aerosols (i.e., tiny
particles) into the atmosphere, lower temperature and are examples of forcings
that drive decreases in temperature.

A recent study found that “almost two-thirds of the impacts related to
atmospheric and ocean temperature can be confidently attributed to
anthropogenic forcing” (meaning human caused drivers).

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/2017/07/AR5_SYR_Figure_1.jpg?itok=xhxht0fx)

Human activity drives climate change.  
Image: IPCC AR 5

Natural climate drivers include the energy from the sun; aerosols from
periodic volcanic eruptions, dust, and salt spray; natural carbon cycle
processes like termite mounds in Africa that emit methane, or tiny organisms
in the ocean surface that take up carbon dioxide; and variation in snow and
ice cover that change how much the Earth’s surface reflects the sun’s energy
back into space (referred to as albedo).

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/07/History_Climate_drivers.jpg)

History of Climate Drivers: Heat-trapping emissions far outweigh the effects
of other drivers acting on Earth’s climate. Volcanic eruptions account for the
cooling spikes seen in the graph in 1883 and 1991.  
Image: IPCC AR 5

Among natural drivers, a large volcanic eruption can have a sharp cooling
influence as it spews tiny particles high into the stratosphere (the layer of
the atmosphere above the troposphere where weather typically occurs).

The massive explosions from Krakatoa (Indonesia) in 1883 and Mount Pinatubo
(Philippines) in 1991, for example, can be seen as the two largest downward
spikes in the volcanic data depicted in the figure to the right. These
particles prevented the full energy of the sun from reaching the surface of
Earth and created a cooling trend for several years.

Human climate drivers include heat-trapping emissions from burning coal, gas
and oil in power plants and cars; cutting down and burning forests; tiny
pollution particles (aerosols); black carbon pollution more commonly referred
to as soot; and changes in land use that also affects Earth’s albedo.

Fossil fuel burning by humans emits tiny particles in addition to releasing
CO2 in the atmosphere. Some particles reflect sunlight back to space
(aerosols), similar to the volcanic particles, having a cooling effect.

Other particles such as soot (black carbon) absorb the sunlight and drive
temperature rise, leading to local warming of the atmosphere level where the
soot particles circulate. Both types of human-created particles lead to a
decrease in the amount of the sun’s energy reaching the surface of the Earth.

Very likely, there would have been even more warming in the past 60 years if
it were not for these human-made and natural tiny particles.

### Natural drivers + human drivers best match reality

Some of these climate drivers result in warming and others lead to cooling,
but when all the natural and human-induced climate drivers are stacked up and
compared to one another, the accumulation of human-released heat-trapping
gases in the atmosphere is so large that it has very likely swamped other
climate drivers over the past half century, leading to observed global
warming.

Much as the Air Force develops computer programs to simulate aircraft flight
under different conditions, climate scientists develop computer programs to
simulate global climate changes under different conditions. These programs use
our knowledge of physical, chemical, and biological processes that occur
within Earth's atmosphere and oceans and on its land surfaces.

Mathematical models allow scientists to simulate the behavior of complex
systems (like climate) and explore how these systems respond to natural and
human factors.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/08/Fig10-21.jpg)

When models take into account both natural and human drivers, they better
reflect the observed changes in temperature.  
Image: IPCC AR5

For a computer model to accurately project the future climate, scientists must
first ensure that it accurately reproduces already observed temperature
changes (i.e., they need to test if they work well).

The scientists working on the IPCC assessments have carefully documented
observed changes in air temperature, ocean temperature, ice retreat, and sea
level rise since the past century. Scientists use climate computer models to
compare these observed changes with natural climate drivers and human climate
drivers.

The IPCC concluded that “the effects [of greenhouse gases], together with
those of other anthropogenic driv­ers, have been detected throughout the
climate system and are extremely likely to have been the dominant cause of the
observed warming since the mid-20th century.”

Scientists reached this conclusion after contrasting observed changes to
different types of drivers. When climate models include only recorded natural
climate drivers, the models cannot accurately reproduce the observed warming
of the past half century. When the models also include human-induced climate
drivers, then they accurately capture recent temperature increases in the
atmosphere and in the oceans. And when all the natural and human-induced
climate drivers are compared to one another, the dramatic accumulation of
carbon from human sources is by far the largest climate change driver over the
past half century.

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/07/Confidence_in_Attribution.jpg)

Confidence in attribution per type of event.  
Image: The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine

Over the years, the models of attribution science have become more
sophisticated, and, in addition to attributing global warming to human caused
emissions, they are also able to determine the contributions of global warming
to extreme events (like floods, heat waves, storms, etc).

In 2016, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
released a report analyzing the state of extreme event attribution science.
The report showed that scientists can evaluate the effect of climate change on
a single extreme event--how human-caused emissions can increase the likelihood
of that event to happen.

Although attribution science is clearer for some types of events than for
others, it is an important step to provide predictive forecasts of extreme
events at longer lead times, reducing risks and improving preparedness.

### Solutions within our reach

We are the cause, we are the solution.

Knowing that human activities are the main driver of global warming helps us
understand how and why our climate is changing, and it clearly defines the
problem as one that is within our power to address.

We cannot avoid some level of warming caused by the heat-trapping emissions
already present in the atmosphere, some of which (such as carbon dioxide and
nitrous oxide) last for 100 years or more. But, with aggressive measures to
reduce emissions and adapt to those changes we cannot avoid, we have a small
window to avoid truly dangerous warming and provide future generations with a
sustainable world.

The Paris Agreement of 2015 calls for a reduction in emissions worldwide
enough to keep global warming under the dangerous threshold of 2 **°** C. We
can reach that goal through immediate and sustained action to reduce our heat-
trapping emissions like adopting technologies that increase energy efficiency,
expanding our use of renewable energy, and slowing deforestation (among other
solutions).

Last revised date: August 1, 2017

## We Need Your Support

to Make Change Happen

We _can_ reduce global warming emissions and ensure communities have the
resources they need to withstand the effects of climate change—but not without
you. Your generous support helps develop science-based solutions for a
healthy, safe, and sustainable future.

  * $25
  * $50
  * $100
  * $250
  * $1000
  * Other

Donate

  * $25
  * $50
  * $100
  * $250
  * $1000
  * Other

Donate

## Share

  * __
  * __
  * __

## Related Content

  * The Causes of Global Warming: A Global Warming FAQ 

  * CO2 and Heat-Trapping Gases FAQ

  * Sun's Effect on Climate FAQ

  * Air Pollution, Aerosols, and Global Warming FAQ

## From our blogs

  * Bury Myers’ NOAA Nomination Dr. Jane Willenbring, Associate Professor at the Institution of Oceanography; Dr. Amy Freitag is a contract social scientistJune 6, 2019
  * Wheeler’s Breathtaking Ignorance of Science, in One Comment Gretchen GoldmanJune 6, 2019
  * Will the Trump USDA Deliver on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans? Our New Report Shows What’s at Stake Sarah ReinhardtJune 6, 2019

More

## On Twitter

Tweets by @UCSUSA

## Infographic

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2017/02/stand-up-for-

science-sidebar-image.jpg)

We are closely monitoring the Trump administration—and fighting back whenever
science is attacked, undermined, or disregarded.

## EXTREME WEATHER AND CLIMATE CHANGE

![Extreme Weather and Climate Change

Infographic](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2014/07/Infographic-

extreme-weather-and-climate-change.jpg?itok=Ig86J4OV)

Strong scientific evidence links climate change with increasing heat waves,
coastal flooding, and other extreme weather events.

## THE CLIMATE ACCOUNTABILITY SCORECARD

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/images/2016/10/gw-sidebar-

graphic-climate-accountability-scorecard-burning.jpg)

See how major fossil fuel companies rank on climate deception, disclosure, and
action.

## WHEN RISING SEAS HIT HOME

![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2017/08/gw-

impacts-story-map-screenshot-play-arrow-thumbnail-308px.jpg)

**INTERACTIVE MAP:** Explore the hundreds of US coastal communities that will
face chronic inundation and possible retreat as sea levels rise.

## WESTERN WILDFIRES AND CLIMATE CHANGE

![Western Wildfires and Climate

Change](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/embedded_default/public/images/2014/07/Infographic-

western-wildfires-and-climate-change.jpg?itok=1BlISsgQ)

Rising temperatures are increasing wildfire risk throughout the Western U.S.

## Take Action

  * ![](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/styles/sidebar_default/public/images/2019/01/gw-air-pollution.jpg?itok=qWFf0EMB)

We have reached a tipping point on climate action—Scientists say we have
roughly one decade left to avoid the most severe consequences of climate
change. Urge your legislators to act on climate.

We need swift, equitable, significant, and effective climate action. >

We use cookies so that you will have the best possible experience on our
website. By continuing to use our site, you accept our use of cookies for site
features. Learn more in our privacy policy.

I Accept

![Untion of Concerned

Scientists](https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/themes/primary/images/logo-

ucs.png)

## Science for a healthy planet and safer world

  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

  * About Us

    * UCS Leadership & Experts
    * Funding & Financials
    * History & Accomplishments
    * Jobs & Internships
    * News
  * Issues
    * Clean Energy
    * Clean Vehicles
    * Food & Agriculture
    * Global Warming
    * Nuclear Power
    * Nuclear Weapons
  * Our Podcast
    * Got Science?
  * Publications
  * Reports & Analysis
  * Center for Science and Democracy
  * Action Center
  * Privacy Policy
  * State Disclosures
  * Our Blogs
    * The Equation
    * All Things Nuclear
  * Site Map
  * Contact Us
  * UCS Store

  * Ways to Give

    * Donate
    * Give Monthly
    * Planned Gifts
  * How to Help

    * Become a Member
    * Take Action
    * Subscribe
  * A **Normal Font Size**

  * A **Larger Font Size**
  * A **Largest Font Size**

**Union of Concerned Scientists**  
2 Brattle Square, Cambridge MA 02138-3780

(C) Union of Concerned Scientists  
UCS is a 501c(3) organization

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

