

Who We Are ▼

###### General Information

  * Letter from Bill and Melinda Gates
  * Leadership
  * History
  * Foundation Fact Sheet
  * Financials
  * Contact Us
  * Regional Offices

###### Resources & Media

  * Annual Letters
  * Annual Reports
  * Press Room

###### Quick Links

  * Careers

What We Do ▼

###### Archive

###### Global Health

  * Discovery & Translational Sciences
  * Enteric and Diarrheal Diseases
  * HIV
  * Malaria
  * Maternal, Newborn & Child Health Discovery & Tools
  * Neglected Tropical Diseases
  * Pneumonia
  * Tuberculosis
  * Vaccine Development and Surveillance

###### Global Development

  * Emergency Response
  * Family Planning
  * Global Libraries
  * Integrated Delivery
  * Maternal, Newborn & Child Health
  * Nutrition
  * Polio
  * Vaccine Delivery

###### Global Growth & Opportunity

  * Agricultural Development
  * Financial Services for the Poor
  * Gender Equality
  * Water, Sanitation & Hygiene

###### U.S. Program

  * K-12 Education
  * Economic Mobility and Opportunity
  * Postsecondary Success
  * Washington State

###### Global Policy & Advocacy

  * Tobacco Control
  * Development Policy and Finance
  * Philanthropic Partnerships
  * Global Education Program

How We Work ▼

###### General Information

  * How We Make Grants
  * Information Sharing Approach
  * Global Access Statement
  * Open Access Policy
  * Grantseeker FAQ
  * Grant Opportunities
  * Grant Seeking Resources
  * What We Do Not Fund

###### Resources for Grantees

  * Our Commitment to Grantees
  * EthicsPoint
  * Grantee Profiles
  * Grantee & Partner Survey Report

###### Quick Links

  * Awarded Grants
  * Contact Us
  * Strategic Investment Fund

Where We Work ▼

  * Africa

  * China

  * Europe

  * India

  * Middle East

Get Involved ▼

  * Foundation Cares

  * Resources for Volunteering

  * Discovery Center

  * Gates Philanthropy Partners
  * Careers
  * Contact Us
  * Search gatesfoundation.org

  * flickr ![](/-/media/GFO/Social-Icons/iconflickrdarkgray.ashx)![](/-/media/GFO/Social-Icons/iconflickrblack.ashx)

  * Facebook ![](/-/media/GFO/Social-Icons/iconfacebookdarkgray.ashx)![](/-/media/GFO/Social-Icons/iconfacebookblack.ashx)
  * Impatient Optimists ![](/-/media/GFO/Social-Icons/iconiodarkgray.ashx)![](/-/media/GFO/Social-Icons/iconioblack.ashx)
  * twitter ![](/-/media/GFO/Social-Icons/icontwitterdarkgray.ashx)![](/-/media/GFO/Social-Icons/icontwitterblack.ashx)
  * youtube ![](/-/media/GFO/Social-Icons/iconyoutubedarkgray.ashx)![](/-/media/GFO/Social-Icons/iconyoutubeblack.ashx)

≡ The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Language Language English

Deutsch

Français

Español

中文

हिंदी

Search gatesfoundation.org

## PLEASE REVIEW OUR UPDATED PRIVACY & COOKIES NOTICE

This site uses cookies and similar technologies to store information on your
computer or device. By continuing to use this site, you agree to the placement
of these cookies and similar technologies. Read our updated Privacy & Cookies
Notice to learn more.

I AGREE

Press Releases and Statements Close

  * Press Releases and Statements
  * Speeches

### Press Room

#### Press Releases and Statements

__Back

Print

## Helping Poor Farmers, Changes Needed to Feed 1 Billion Hungry | Bill &

Melinda Gates Foundation

Announces nearly $200 million in new agriculture grants, bringing foundation
total to over $2 billion

Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation

206-709-3400

media@gatesfoundation.org

follow @gatesfoundation

Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation  
Phone: +1.206.709.3400  
Email: media@gatesfoundation.org

ROME -- Bill Gates, co-chair of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, told the
international agricultural community it had fallen short of delivering the
help small farmers in developing countries need, when they need it. In a
speech delivered at the International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD), Gates asked the UN bodies responsible for fighting hunger and poverty
to unite around a common global target for sustainable productivity growth to
guide and measure their efforts.

"If you care about the poorest, you care about agriculture," said Gates.
"Investments in agriculture are the best weapons against hunger and poverty,
and they have made life better for billions of people. The international
agriculture community needs to be more innovative, coordinated, and focused to
help poor farmers grow more. If we can do that, we can dramatically reduce
suffering and build self-sufficiency."

Gates told IFAD, the World Food Programme (WFP), and the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) that the approach being used today to fight against poverty
and hunger is outdated and inefficient. He urged these food agencies to commit
to a concrete, measurable target for increasing agricultural productivity and
to support a system of public score cards to maximize transparency for
themselves, donors, and the countries they support.

"The goal is to move from examples of success to sustainable productivity
increases to hundreds of millions of people moving out of poverty," said
Gates. "If we hope to meet that goal, it must be a goal we share. We must be
coordinated in our pursuit of it. We must embrace more innovative ways of
working toward it. And we must be willing to be measured on our results."

The number of hungry people in the world has reached the 1 billion mark, and
global food prices that were beginning to fall last July--signaling some
relief--are starting to creep up again. According to estimates, small farmers
in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa can double or almost triple their yields,
respectively, in the next 20 years. This sustainable productivity increase
will translate into 400 million people lifting themselves out of poverty.

"History has shown us what's possible when people can grow enough food. If we
want to transform the lives of people in Africa, we need to focus our efforts
on raising agricultural productivity, creating markets and making agriculture
a business not a development activity," said Akin Adesina, Nigerian Minister
of Agriculture and Rural Development.

Gates also announced nearly $200 million in grants, bringing to more than $2
billion the foundation's commitment to smallholder farmers since the
agriculture program began in 2006. The foundation takes a comprehensive
approach to supporting small farmers so progress against hunger and poverty is
sustainable for the economy and the environment.

The money will fund agricultural development projects that are already
producing great results for farmers, with a goal to help millions of small
farmers lift themselves out of poverty. This re-investment will be in projects
that have already:

  * Supported the release of 34 new varieties of drought-tolerant maize
  * Delivered vaccines to tens of millions of livestock
  * Trained more than 10,000 agro-dealers to equip and train farmers

New foundation grants will go to support:

  * Breaking down gender barriers so women farmers can increase productivity
  * Controlling contamination that affects 25 percent of world food crops
  * Creating an innovative system to monitor the effects of agricultural productivity on the population and environment

"When Melinda and I started our foundation more than a decade ago, we
initially focused on inequities in global health. But as we spent more time
learning about the diseases of poverty, we realized that many of the poorest
people in the world were small farmers. The conclusion was obvious. They could
lift their families up by growing more food," explained Gates.

The Thirty-Fifth Session of IFAD's Governing Council, entitled "Sustainable
smallholder agriculture: Feeding the World, protecting the planet," provided a
forum for governments and the agricultural development community to discuss
ways to grow 70 percent more food by 2050 to feed a growing, more urbanized
population.

"IFAD works in remote areas where few development partners have ventured,
helping poor farmers raise not only their yields but their incomes," said IFAD
President Kanayo F. Nwanze. "Development fails when imposed from above. IFAD's
ground-up approach helps farmers build strong organizations that give them
more power in the marketplace and a greater voice in the decisions that affect
their lives so that they can earn more, eat better, and educate their
children."

Grants announced today include:

### Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa ― Program for Africa's Seed

System (PASS): Phase 2

This $56 million grant will increase the availability and accessibility of
more resilient and higher-yielding seed varieties of important food crops in
sub-Saharan Africa to increase productivity and improve smallholder farmer
livelihoods. PASS's ultimate goal is to develop a sustainable and thriving
national product development and delivery system to serve smallholder farmers.
For more information, contact Sylvia Mwichuli, SMwichuli@agra-alliance.org,
Tel: +254.20.3750.627, Mobile: +254.736.880.620. Release can be found here.

### CARE ― Pathway to Secure Livelihoods

The foundation is investing $15 million to increase the productivity and
empowerment of women farmers in more equitable agricultural systems at scale
in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. This five-year, six-country program
implements and tests a powerful "graduated livelihoods" model that leverages
the power of community-based savings and producer groups toward increasing
poor women farmers' agricultural productivity, and ensuring long-term access
and control over key agricultural resources. For more information, contact
Nicole Harris, Tel: +1.404.979.9503. Release can be found here.

### Conservation International ― Integrated Monitoring System for Ecosystem

Services in African Agricultural Landscapes

The foundation will be funding a three-year $10 million project to provide
new, integrated, scientific information that helps African policymakers,
organizations, scientists, and farmers improve their decision making regarding
agricultural practices and policies to foster sustainable agricultural growth
while protecting natural resources and reducing poverty. For more information,
contact Sandy Andelman, Executive Director, African Monitoring System (AMS),
Vice President Conservation International, Tel: +1-703-341-2690 or Kim McCabe,
Senior Director, News & Media, Conservation International, Tel:
+1-703-341-2546. Release can be found here.

### Global Alliance for Livestock Veterinary Medicines (GALVmed) ― Protecting

Livestock, Saving Human Life: Phase 2

In a project co-funded by the UK's Department for International Development
(DFID) to improve livestock health, the foundation is providing $41 million
over five years to support the development and delivery of key veterinary
vaccines, medicines, and diagnostics for poor farmers in sub-Saharan Africa
and South Asia. This grant focuses on diseases that affect primarily cattle,
sheep, goats, and chickens. For more information, contact Charlotte Black,
Fleishman-Hillard, Tel: +44 (0)20 7395 7124, Mobile: +44 (0)7814666627.
Release can be found here.

### International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT),) ― Drought-

Tolerant Maize for Africa: Phase 3

Totaling $33 million, this four-year grant will aid the development of
drought-tolerant maize varieties that reduce the risk of crop failure and
improve the lives of up to seven million farm families in sub-Saharan Africa.
In this phase, the project will build upon progress and expand, accelerate,
and enhance breeding programs and seed systems. Release can be found here.

### International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics ―

Tropical Legumes II (TL2): Phase 2

The foundation will provide $21 million over three years to develop improved
varieties of legumes that can withstand drought, disease, and insects to
reduce crop failure for small farmers in India, Bangladesh, and 13 African
countries. The Tropical Legumes II (TL2) project will build upon progress to
date and identify new varieties of groundnut, cowpea, common bean, chickpea,
pigeonpea, and soybean. Release can be found here.

### Meridian Institute ― Partnership for Aflatoxin Control in Africa (PACA),

Meridian Institute

With a $20 million grant over five years, the foundation hopes to control
aflatoxin, a deadly fungus, among crops in eight African countries by
developing an Africa-based and Africa-led multicountry partnership to
implement aflatoxin control projects, and by raising awareness of the health
and financial impacts associated with this cancer-causing toxin. For more
information, contact Barbara L. Stinson, Tel: +1.303.670.5161. Release can be
found here.

Visit Our Blog

## DISCOVERY CENTER

At the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Discovery Center, you'll find stories
of work that is improving lives, from Seattle to South Africa.

Plan a visit

440 5th Ave N.  
Seattle, WA 98109  
(206) 709-3100 ext.7100

Open: Tues - Sat  
10 a.m. - 5 p.m.  
Admission: Free

## Sign Up to Receive Updates from the Gates Foundation

##

By clicking Sign Up, you agree to the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation's
Privacy and Cookie Notice.

  * flickr
  * Facebook
  * twitter
  * youtube
  * Impatient Optimist Blog →

© 1999-2019 Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.  
All Rights Reserved.

  * Be Aware of Fraudulent Activity
  * Contact Us
  * Privacy & Cookies Notice
  * Terms of Use
  * Brand Guidelines
  * 京ICP备18034642号

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

