

Skip to content

See All Topics

Topics

  * Science & Engineering
  * African Americans
  * Aircraft
  * Apollo Program
  * Art
  * Astronauts
  * Astronomers
  * Astronomy
  * Aviators
  * Awards
  * Balloons & Airships
  * Business

All Topics

  * Top Stories

  * Aviation

  * Space
  * Exploration

  * Donate Now

Language

  * English | English
  * Arabic | عربى
  * Chinese | 简体中文
  * French | Français
  * German | Deutsch
  * Hindi | हिन्दी
  * Italian | Italiano
  * Japanese | 日本語
  * Korean | 한국어
  * Portuguese | Português
  * Spanish | Español
  * Powered By   
Google Translate

## Search Google Appliance

Sitewide Search Form

Search entire website by keyword

Leave this field blank

# National Air and Space Museum

  * Visit More

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/events/WEB11128-2009h_1.jpg?itok=iq_c0add)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

Visit

### One Museum, Two Locations

Visit us in Washington, DC and Chantilly, VA to explore hundreds of the
world’s most significant objects in aviation and space history.

    
    
    * Museum in DC
    * Udvar-Hazy Center in VA
    * IMAX and Planetarium
    * Events
    * Educators
    * Families
    * Group Reservations
    

  * Exhibitions More

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/events/NASM2015-05268.jpg?itok=QtJt7PqT)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

Exhibitions

### Boeing Milestones of Flight Hall

Learn how aviation and spaceflight transformed the world.

    
    
    * Now on View
    * Upcoming
    * Past
    * Online
    

  * Collections More

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/dropdown/NASM2016-02698.jpg?itok=FXAwh3yM)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

Collections

### Lunar Module LM-2

The lunar module represents one of humanity’s greatest achievements: landing
people on another heavenly body.

    
    
    * Search the Collections 
    * About the Collection
    * Objects On Display
    * Archival Collection
    * Preservation & Restoration
    

  * Learn More

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/news/12969_640.jpg?itok=yfYMGFEL)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

Learn

### STEM in 30

Don’t miss our fast-paced webcasts designed to engage students in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math in 30 minutes.

    
    
    * Multimedia Gallery
    * Educator Resources
    * Highlighted Topics
    

  * Connect More

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/editoral-

stories/thumbnails/GPN-2001-000014h.jpg?itok=xGa7f_JG)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

Connect

### Share Your Story

Apollo 11 was a global event. What did that historic mission mean to you?
Share your story and read what others have to say.

    
    
    * Air and Space Live
    * Share Your Story
    * STEM in 30
    * What's New in Aerospace?
    

  * Research More

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/events/4440h.jpg?itok=mLIzj7Zx)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

Research

### Mars

Our scientists are involved in current research focused on the Martian climate
and geology. Find out what we’re discovering.

    
    
    * Projects
    * Publications
    * Resources
    * Fellowships
    

  * Support More

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/dropdown/2006-25594h.jpg?itok=wrnIFspO)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

Support

### Wall of Honor

Recognize your favorite air or space enthusiast. Add his or her name to the
Museum’s Wall of Honor.

    
    
    * Donate
    * Membership
    * Wall of Honor
    * Ways To Give
    * Corporate Giving
    * Host an Event
    * Get Involved
    

Story

# Today, Mars is warmer than Earth. See how we compare.

Posted on Fri, January 5, 2018

  * by: Hillary Brady

Office of Communications

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_half/public/images/editoral-

stories/thumbnails/PIA00194h.jpg?itok=p1d4InNQ)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

favorite

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Pinterest
  * Google +
  * Email

The northeastern United States is experiencing record-breaking cold weather,
with temperatures 20 to 30 degrees below average, according to the National
Weather Service. Those are temperatures so frigid that parts of Mars—a cold,
desert planet—are actually warmer than certain spots in the U.S. But how does
Mars’ climate compare to that of our home planet?

Overall, Mars is cold—its average global temperature is around -80 degrees
Fahrenheit—and has a much thinner atmosphere than Earth. Because it has about
a sixth of the pressure of Earth’s atmosphere, the planet doesn’t retain heat
very long, causing temperatures to drop quickly.

“The temperature on Mars right near the surface, in the path of the Sun, is
going to be a lot warmer than if you were to raise even five feet up. There
might be a 15-20 degree temperature change between where your feet are and
where your head is if you were standing on Mars,” Matthew Shindell, curator of
planetary science and exploration, said. Temperatures also dip drastically
from day to night because there is little to retain heat on the planet. The
sand and rocks of Mars’ surface lose their heat quickly.

While we experience temperature drops like that here on Earth—Shindell
compared it to how hot desert climates cool substantially after sundown—it
happens on a much different scale on Mars. “The thinner atmosphere is the big
game changer,” he said.

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/body_large/public/images/6044h.jpg?itok=BOi3UZlY)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

Like Earth, Mars spins on an axis tilted about 25 degrees from its orbital
plane. Mars has no large satellite like the Moon, just its two small moons
Phobos and Deimos. As a result, the tug of gravity from the Sun and the large
planets causes a slow wobble in the tilt, or obliquity, of its axis. During
periods of higher obliquity, the atmosphere is thicker, dust storms are more
intense, and water now trapped at the poles moves to the equatorial region to
form mountain glaciers. Many glacial landforms from the last time this
occurred can still be seen on Mars.

There are other things to consider when comparing weather data, like the
seasons of the respective planets and the locations where temperature is
measured.

“Similar to the Earth, Mars is tilted on its axis. Right now its axial tilt is
about the same as it is on Earth, which means that as the planet orbits around
the Sun, you’re having the same type of seasons on Mars as we experience on
Earth,” Jennifer Whitten, postdoctoral fellow at the Museum’s Center for Earth
and Planetary Studies, said.

Here in North America, we’re in the midst of a bitter winter. South of Mars’
equator, where the Curiosity rover is recording weather data, is experiencing
what Whitten calls a “tropical wintertime.”

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/body_large/public/11921h.jpg?itok=NDaHYid-)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

A self portrait of the Mars Science Laboratory _Curiosity_ on the surface of
Mars.

That equatorial region is at the start of its winter season right now, so
temperature comparisons are a little skewed—our coldest temperatures versus
some of Mars’ warmest. Recently on Mars (on what would have been January 1,
2018 on Earth), the ground temperature was a high of -6 Celsius, or 21.2
Fahrenheit. That’s on par, or above, the temperatures on Earth in the
northeastern United States. The ground temperature on Mars later dipped down
to a low of -82 degrees Celsius—that’s -115.6 Fahrenheit, so by that
measurement, Mars has us beat for frigid temperatures.

Extreme weather, like some are experiencing on Earth right now, also happens
on Mars, but in a different way.

“There are no oceans or other geographic features like we have on Earth that
regulate climate,” Whitten said. “The oceans and movement of water regulate
temperate a bit. On Mars, you have a mostly dry landscape sprinkled with
craters, volcanoes and valleys. The topography affects the weather.”

On Mars, that means wind and dust.

Dust storms are common on the Red Planet. These can be small tornadoes, called
dust devils, or global storms that form when the Sun heats dust on the
surface, causing it to rise up into the planet’s thin atmosphere. NASA’s first
images from Mars, taken by the Mariner 9 spacecraft in 1971, were captured in
the midst of one of these dust storms. Because of Mars’ atmosphere, though,
the wind doesn’t blow too fast—at its peak, only about half of the wind speed
of a hurricane on Earth.

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/body_large/public/images/4015_640.jpg?itok=4RgTo_l1)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

A towering dust devil casts a serpentine shadow over the Martian surface in
this image acquired by the HiRISE camera on NASA's Mars Reconnaissance
Orbiter.

Scientists also believe that the planet has experienced large climatic
changes, including global snowstorms, when the planet’s axis wobbled and
pointed its polar cap toward the sun. This caused trapped C02 from its coldest
regions to melt or sublime. Geophysical evidence, gathered from decades of
studying the planet and its climate, points to this, but we’ve never witnessed
this type of storm. That’s because it happens infrequently—once every 10 to 20
million years or so.

Though on Earth we can count on our next bout with winter weather to happen a
little sooner than it will on Mars, Shindell noted that these extreme
temperatures are a small taste of what astronauts would encounter when
exploring the Red Planet. So, if you break out your winter parka this weekend,
we give you permission to pretend it’s a spacesuit.

### You may also like

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/exhibitions/hero-

images/WEB12036-2011_640.jpg?itok=Ea8mmeQJ)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

favorite

Exhibition

### Exploring the Planets

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/collection-

objects/record-

images/NASM2015-03447.jpg?itok=aqGYL8oS)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

favorite

Object

### Model, Mars Science Laboratory, Mars Rover Curiosity

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/editoral-

stories/thumbnails/4255h.jpg?itok=h6I0_qWb)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

favorite

Story

### Satisfying Our Curiosity: Mars Science Laboratory and...

![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/callout_tile/public/images/editoral-

stories/thumbnails/5945h.jpg?itok=MQjdqzv6)![](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/loaders/placeholder.gif)

favorite

Story

### Meridiani Planum and the Search for Ice on Mars

View the discussion thread.

## Related Topics

  * Exploration
  * Space
  * Mars
  * Rovers

# National Air and Space Museum

### Stay up to date on the latest stories and events with our newsletter Learn

More

Email Signup

Email *

## Status message

Thank you. You have successfully signed up for our newsletter.

## Error message

Sorry, there was a problem. Please ensure your details are valid and try
again.

Email powered by BlackbaudPrivacy Policy | Terms of Use

### One Museum, Two Locations

Free Admission

![Map showing the two National Air and Space Museuem

locations](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/all/themes/nasm/images/utility/u-img-

map.jpg) Visit Information

#### National Air and Space Museum

Independence Ave at 6th St, SW  
Washington, DC 20560  
202-633-2214

Today's Hours: 10 am – 5:30 pm

#### Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center

14390 Air and Space Museum Parkway  
Chantilly, VA 20151  
703-572-4118

Today's Hours: 10 am – 5:30 pm

![Learn how you can get involved with Transforming the

Museum](https://airandspace.si.edu/sites/default/files/styles/large/public/images/footer/ignite-

tomorrow.png?itok=USxv9e-7)

Get Involved

  * About
  * Newsroom
  * Support
  * Get Involved
  * Contact

  * Smithsonian Institution

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy

  * Facebook

  * Twitter
  * Instagram
  * YouTube
  * Flickr
  * Rss Link

View your favorites

![dcsimg](//logs1.smithsonian.museum/dcsi0ld87cdzpx7ebrt19zddz_5p3c/njs.gif?dcsuri=/nojavascript&WT.js=No&WT.tv=10.4.23&dcssip=www.si.edu)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

