

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4181515/img/28977)
  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to navigation
  * Resources
    * All Resources
    * Chemicals & Bioassays
    * BioSystems
    * PubChem BioAssay
    * PubChem Compound
    * PubChem Structure Search
    * PubChem Substance
    * All Chemicals & Bioassays Resources...
    * DNA & RNA
    * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
    * BLAST (Stand-alone)
    * E-Utilities
    * GenBank
    * GenBank: BankIt
    * GenBank: Sequin
    * GenBank: tbl2asn
    * Genome Workbench
    * Influenza Virus
    * Nucleotide Database
    * PopSet
    * Primer-BLAST
    * ProSplign
    * Reference Sequence (RefSeq)
    * RefSeqGene
    * Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
    * Splign
    * Trace Archive
    * UniGene
    * All DNA & RNA Resources...
    * Data & Software
    * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
    * BLAST (Stand-alone)
    * Cn3D
    * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
    * E-Utilities
    * GenBank: BankIt
    * GenBank: Sequin
    * GenBank: tbl2asn
    * Genome ProtMap
    * Genome Workbench
    * Primer-BLAST
    * ProSplign
    * PubChem Structure Search
    * SNP Submission Tool
    * Splign
    * Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST)
    * All Data & Software Resources...
    * Domains & Structures
    * BioSystems
    * Cn3D
    * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
    * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
    * Structure (Molecular Modeling Database)
    * Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST)
    * All Domains & Structures Resources...
    * Genes & Expression
    * BioSystems
    * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
    * E-Utilities
    * Gene
    * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Database 
    * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Datasets
    * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Profiles
    * Genome Workbench
    * HomoloGene
    * Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
    * RefSeqGene
    * UniGene
    * All Genes & Expression Resources...
    * Genetics & Medicine
    * Bookshelf
    * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
    * Genetic Testing Registry
    * Influenza Virus
    * Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
    * PubMed
    * PubMed Central (PMC)
    * PubMed Clinical Queries
    * RefSeqGene
    * All Genetics & Medicine Resources...
    * Genomes & Maps
    * Database of Genomic Structural Variation (dbVar)
    * GenBank: tbl2asn
    * Genome
    * Genome Project
    * Genome Data Viewer (GDV)
    * Genome ProtMap
    * Genome Workbench
    * Influenza Virus
    * Nucleotide Database
    * PopSet
    * ProSplign
    * Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
    * Splign
    * Trace Archive
    * All Genomes & Maps Resources...
    * Homology
    * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
    * BLAST (Stand-alone)
    * BLAST Link (BLink)
    * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
    * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
    * Genome ProtMap
    * HomoloGene
    * Protein Clusters
    * All Homology Resources...
    * Literature
    * Bookshelf
    * E-Utilities
    * Journals in NCBI Databases
    * MeSH Database
    * NCBI Handbook
    * NCBI Help Manual
    * NCBI News & Blog
    * PubMed
    * PubMed Central (PMC)
    * PubMed Clinical Queries
    * All Literature Resources...
    * Proteins
    * BioSystems
    * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
    * BLAST (Stand-alone)
    * BLAST Link (BLink)
    * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
    * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
    * E-Utilities
    * ProSplign
    * Protein Clusters
    * Protein Database
    * Reference Sequence (RefSeq)
    * All Proteins Resources...
    * Sequence Analysis
    * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
    * BLAST (Stand-alone)
    * BLAST Link (BLink)
    * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
    * Genome ProtMap
    * Genome Workbench
    * Influenza Virus
    * Primer-BLAST
    * ProSplign
    * Splign
    * All Sequence Analysis Resources...
    * Taxonomy
    * Taxonomy
    * Taxonomy Browser
    * Taxonomy Common Tree
    * All Taxonomy Resources...
    * Training & Tutorials
    * NCBI Education Page
    * NCBI Handbook
    * NCBI Help Manual
    * NCBI News & Blog
    * All Training & Tutorials Resources...
    * Variation
    * Database of Genomic Structural Variation (dbVar)
    * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
    * Database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (dbSNP)
    * SNP Submission Tool
    * All Variation Resources...
  * How To
    * All How To
    * Chemicals & Bioassays
    * DNA & RNA
    * Data & Software
    * Domains & Structures
    * Genes & Expression
    * Genetics & Medicine
    * Genomes & Maps
    * Homology
    * Literature
    * Proteins
    * Sequence Analysis
    * Taxonomy
    * Training & Tutorials
    * Variation
  * About NCBI Accesskeys

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PubMed

US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health

Search databaseAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarCloneConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarESTGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO
ProfilesGSSGTRHomoloGeneIdentical Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

  * Advanced
  * Help

## Result Filters

  * Format: Abstract

Format

  * Summary
  * Summary (text)
  * Abstract
  * Abstract (text)
  * MEDLINE
  * XML
  * PMID List

Apply

#### Send to

Choose Destination

  * File
  * Clipboard
  * Collections
  * E-mail
  * Order
  * My Bibliography
  * Citation manager

  * FormatSummary (text)Abstract (text)MEDLINEXMLPMID ListCSV

Create File

  * 1 selected item: 9225636
  * FormatSummarySummary (text)AbstractAbstract (text)MEDLINEXMLPMID ListMeSH and Other Data
  * E-mail
  * Subject
  * Additional text
  * E-mail

Didn't get the message? Find out why...

Add to Clipboard

Add to Collections

Order articles

Add to My Bibliography

Generate a file for use with external citation management software.

Create File

Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Suppl. 1997;164:43-5.

# Induced abortion--a global health problem.

Odlind V1.

### Author information

1

    
    
    Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Uppsala, Sweden.
    

### Abstract

Every year around 500,000 women are estimated to die from pregnancy-related
causes, the majority in the developing world and many as a consequence of
unsafe abortion. Around 25 per cent of maternal deaths in Asia and 30-50 per
cent of maternal deaths in Africa and Latin America occur as a result of
induced abortion. Data on abortion related maternal morbidity is less reliable
than mortality but suggests that for every maternal death 10-15 women suffer
significant pregnancy-related morbidity, i.e. infertility, genito-urinary
problems and/or chronic pain. Induced abortion occurs in practically every
society in the world but only 40 per cent of the women in the world live in
countries where abortion is legally free. A permissive legislation is an
important prerequisite for medically safe and early abortion. Oppositely, with
a restrictive law, abortion is difficult to obtain, costly and possibly
unsafe, in particular to the least affluent women in the society. Induced
abortion in a developed country with legal and easy access to services is a
safe procedure with hardly any mortality and very low morbidity. The best
strategy to reduce the number of unsafe abortions is prevention of unwanted
pregnancy. The consequences of unsafe abortion on women's health need to be
acknowledged by everybody in the society in order to improve abortion care. It
is necessary to adjust legal and other barriers to medically safe abortion in
order to follow the declaration at the UN conference on population in Cairo,
1994, which stated that abortion, wherever legal, should be safe. It is also
necessary to introduce preventive measures where abortions are performed, i.e.
good and easily accessible family planning services.

PMID:

    
    
    9225636
    
     [Indexed for MEDLINE]
    

Share

### MeSH terms

#### MeSH terms

  * Abortion, Induced/mortality*
  * Abortion, Legal
  * Developing Countries
  * Family Planning Services
  * Female
  * Humans
  * Internationality*
  * Pregnancy
  * Pregnant Women
  * Resource Allocation

### LinkOut - more resources

#### Full Text Sources

  * Ovid Technologies, Inc.

  * 

## Supplemental Content

![Loading ... ](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4185393/img/3631476)

You are here: NCBI > Literature > PubMed

Support Center
![](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_app=entrez&ncbi_db=pubmed&ncbi_pdid=abstract&ncbi_phid=CE88D70ECF9A9BA10000000007FF04C9)

## Simple NCBI Directory

  * ### Getting Started

  * NCBI Education

  * NCBI Help Manual
  * NCBI Handbook
  * Training & Tutorials
  * Submit Data

  * ### Resources

  * Chemicals & Bioassays

  * Data & Software
  * DNA & RNA
  * Domains & Structures
  * Genes & Expression
  * Genetics & Medicine
  * Genomes & Maps
  * Homology
  * Literature
  * Proteins
  * Sequence Analysis
  * Taxonomy
  * Variation

  * ### Popular

  * PubMed

  * Bookshelf
  * PubMed Central
  * BLAST
  * Nucleotide
  * Genome
  * SNP
  * Gene
  * Protein
  * PubChem

  * ### Featured

  * Genetic Testing Registry

  * GenBank
  * Reference Sequences
  * Gene Expression Omnibus
  * Genome Data Viewer
  * Human Genome
  * Mouse Genome
  * Influenza Virus
  * Primer-BLAST
  * Sequence Read Archive

  * ### NCBI Information

  * About NCBI

  * Research at NCBI
  * NCBI News & Blog
  * NCBI FTP Site
  * NCBI on Facebook
  * NCBI on Twitter
  * NCBI on YouTube
  * Privacy Policy

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

