

Breaking News

World+

USAfricaAmericasAsiaAustraliaChinaEuropeMiddle EastIndiaUK

WorldUS PoliticsBusinessEntertainmentSportTravelStyleHealthVideo

Live TV __

Search »

International Edition+

U.S.

International

Arabic

Español

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

International Edition+

U.S.

International

Arabic

Español

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

Home

World

  * US
  * Africa
  * Americas
  * Asia
  * Australia
  * China
  * Europe
  * Middle East
  * India
  * UK

US Politics

  * 45
  * Congress
  * Supreme Court
  * Facts First
  * 2020 Election

Business

  * Markets
  * Tech
  * Media
  * Success
  * Perspectives
  * Video

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_entertainment.png)

  * Stars
  * Screen
  * Binge
  * Culture
  * Media

Tech

  * Innovate
  * Gadget
  * Mission: Ahead
  * Upstarts
  * Business Evolved
  * Work Transformed
  * Innovative Cities

Sport

  * Football
  * Tennis
  * Equestrian
  * Golf
  * Skiing
  * Horse Racing
  * Formula E
  * F1
  * Sailing
  * Rugby

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_travel.png)

  * Destinations
  * Food & Drink
  * Play
  * Stay
  * Videos

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_style_new.png)

  * Arts
  * Design
  * Fashion
  * Architecture
  * Luxury
  * Autos
  * Video

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_health.png)

  * Food
  * Fitness
  * Wellness
  * Parenting
  * Live Longer

Features

  * Freedom Project
  * Impact Your World
  * Inside Africa
  * 2 degrees
  * CNN Heroes
  * All Features

Video

  * Video news
  * Feature shows
  * HLN
  * TV shows
  * TV schedule
  * Faces of CNN Worldwide
  * CNNVR

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/vr/vr_new_asset.png)

  * How To Watch VR
  * Archives

More…

  * Weather
  * CNN Profiles
  * Leadership
  * Pressroom
  * Partner sites
  * Work for CNN

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_nav_bottom.png)U.S.

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_nav_bottom.png)International

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_espaniol.png)Español

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/logo_cnn_arabic.png)Arabic

Set edition preference:

U.S.InternationalConfirm

FacebookTwitterInstagram

![Massive iceberg breaks away from

Antarctica](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170713031715-larsen-c-ice-shelf-

antarctica-iceberg-breaks-away-exlarge-169.jpg)

![Massive iceberg breaks away from

Antarctica](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170713031715-larsen-c-ice-shelf-

antarctica-iceberg-breaks-away-exlarge-169.jpg)

### JUST WATCHED

## Massive iceberg breaks away from Antarctica

Replay

More Videos ...

#### MUST WATCH

Massive iceberg breaks away from Antarctica 01:50

# That huge iceberg should freak you out. Here's why

By John D. Sutter, CNN

Updated 0127 GMT (0927 HKT) July 16, 2017

Chat with us in Facebook Messenger. Find out what's happening in the world as
it unfolds.

" _John D. Sutter is a columnist for CNN who focuses on climate change and
social justice. Follow him on_ _Snapchat_ _,_ _Twitter_ _and_ _Facebook_ _or
subscribe to his_ _email newsletter._ "

(CNN) This week, a trillion-ton hunk of ice broke off Antarctica.

You probably know that. It was all over the Internet.

Among the details that have been repeated ad nauseam: The iceberg is nearly
the size of Delaware, which prompted some fun musing on Twitter about where
exactly Delaware is and how anyone is supposed to approximate the square
footage of that US state. The ice, which has been named A68, represents more
than 12% of the Larsen C ice shelf, a sliver on the Antarctic Peninsula. And
most important: None of this has anything to do with man-made climate change.

The problem: That last detail -- the climate one -- is misleading at best.

At worst, it's wrong.

Read More

Some scientists think this has a lot to do with global warming.

I spent most of Thursday on the phone with scientists, talking to them about
the huge iceberg off Antarctica and what it means. Here are my five takeaways.

### 1. This doesn't NOT look like climate change.

There is no disagreement among climate scientists about whether humans are
warming the Earth by burning fossil fuels and polluting the atmosphere with
greenhouse gases. We are. And we see the consequences.

But there is some dispute about whether there is enough evidence to tie the
breakoff of this particular piece of ice to global warming.

In a widely quoted statement, Martin O'Leary, a Swansea University
glaciologist who was part of the team studying Larsen C, said that the iceberg
calving was "a natural event" and that "we're not aware of any link to human-
induced climate change."

Not everyone agrees with that assessment, however.

At 6,000 square kilometers, the Larsen C ice sheet could be one of the world's
biggest ever icebergs.

_Source: University of Edinburgh/Noel Gourmelen_

"They're looking at it through a microscope" rather than seeing macro trends,
including the fact that oceans around Antarctica are warming, helping thin the
ice, said Kevin Trenberth, a distinguished senior scientist at the US National
Center for Atmospheric Research.

"To me, it's an unequivocal signature of the impact of climate change on
Larsen C," said Eric Rignot, a glaciologist at NASA's Jet Propulsion
Laboratory and the University of California, Irvine. "This is not a natural
cycle. This is the response of the system to a warmer climate from the top and
from the bottom. Nothing else can cause this."

Rignot said colleagues who say otherwise are burying their heads "in the ice."

### 2. That said, this s*** is complicated.

The difference in opinion stems, in part, from a perceived lack of data.
Compared with other parts of the world, Antarctica is cold, weird, remote and
hard to study. Some scientists say they don't have the super-long-term
datasets they would need to prove that man-made warming affected this
particular ice sheet.

Conversely, they can't disprove global warming's contribution, either.

"I myself don't see clear evidence convincing me that this is climate change-
related," said Christopher Shuman, a research scientist at NASA's Goddard
Space Flight Center and the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. "I think
we need to wait and see. We need to watch carefully and wait for the signs."

If the Larsen C ice shelf continues to collapse, he said, we'll know that
climate change had something to do with this week's events. If not, his theory
will be confirmed, meaning the iceberg is part of a natural cycle of calving
and regeneration.

Nearby ice sheets with similar names -- Larsen A and B -- broke down for
reasons that are related to climate change, Shuman said. The cause of Larsen
C's break this week is less clear, he said, because it's winter in the
Antarctic now; there was no evidence of meltwater on the surface of the
iceberg, and there aren't enough data about temperature trends in that area,
both in the water and in the air.

Rignot, the scientist in California, said the fact that this collapse happened
during the dead of winter in the Southern Hemisphere makes it all the more
remarkable.

He sees the broader collapse of the Larsen C ice shelf as inevitable.

The question for him is when: likely 10, 20, maybe 30 years, he said.

### 3. Climate change certainly is reshaping Antarctica.

Further complicating things, climate change is reshaping Earth's southernmost
continent in a variety of ways. Air temperatures have risen over the Antarctic
Peninsula, where Larsen C is located, said David Vaughan, director of science
at the British Antarctic Survey, but not as much in other locations.

Ocean temperatures are up worldwide too, including near Antarctica, he said.
"The amount of heat that's going into the ocean is really huge," Trenberth
said.

That's helping thaw some of the ice from above and below. Ice that touches the
water is thought to be particularly vulnerable to the effects of global
warming. But, again, Antarctica is big and cold and weird. It's not melting as
quickly as ice in the Arctic, where temperatures are rising about twice as
fast as the global average.

It's clear that some ice sheets in Antarctica are melting because of climate
change and that some glaciers are getting thinner, researchers told me. The
question is whether there are sufficient data to say that this particular
iceberg was broken off because of greenhouse gas pollution.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170712110656-0712-larsen-c-01-large-169.jpg)

"Do I believe that's a climate change impact? Probably. Not 100%," said
Vaughan, of the British Antarctic Survey. "But the reason the warm water comes
onto the continental shelf at all is because of the winds that blow across the
southern ocean, and we believe the winds have gotten more intense because of
climate change.

"This is not straightforward," he added. "It's simply not as straightforward
as 'the temperature rises and the ice melts.' It's a whole chain of quite
subtle and very consecutive processes that cause the ice to melt and the sea
levels to rise."

So, again, it's complicated.

But step back from the microscope: Greenhouse gas pollution is contributing to
warming and melting.

### 4. The type of ice you're talking about matters.

To better understand the ice in Antarctica, imagine a cocktail glass with ice
and liquid in it. What happens to the level of the drink as the ice melts?

"When my ice melts, the cocktail doesn't overflow," said Rignot, the
glaciologist. The surface stays about level.

This type of ice -- the floating-in-water kind -- is what broke off into the
ocean this week in Antarctica. Scientists call it an "ice shelf." As opposed
to a glaciers or ice sheets, which are found on land, floating ice shelves
don't raise global sea levels appreciably when they break off into the ocean
and melt.

Again, think of the cocktail glass.

But -- and this is an important "but" -- those floating ice shelves often have
a "buttressing effect" on inland ice masses that _will_ raise global sea
levels if they melt, said Trenberth, the climate scientist at the National
Center for Atmospheric Research. As that fringe of ice goes, it can help to
start destabilizing the middle.

![A flooded street in Miami Beach in September 2015. The flood was caused by a

combination of seasonal high tides and what many believe is a rise in sea

levels due to climate change. Miami Beach has already built <a

href="http://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/29/opinions/sutter-miami-beach-

survive-climate/index.html">miles of seawalls</a> and has

embarked on a five-year, $400 million stormwater pump program to keep the

ocean waters from inundating the

city.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![A flooded street in Miami Beach in September 2015. The flood was caused by a

combination of seasonal high tides and what many believe is a rise in sea

levels due to climate change. Miami Beach has already built <a

href="http://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/29/opinions/sutter-miami-beach-

survive-climate/index.html">miles of seawalls</a> and has

embarked on a five-year, $400 million stormwater pump program to keep the

ocean waters from inundating the

city.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170413165536-miami-beach-flood-

super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Florida - A flooded street in Miami Beach in September 2015. The flood was
caused by a combination of seasonal high tides and what many believe is a rise
in sea levels due to climate change. Miami Beach has already built miles of
seawalls and has embarked on a five-year, $400 million stormwater pump program
to keep the ocean waters from inundating the city.

Hide Caption

1 of 14

![Sea water collects in front of a home in Tangier, Virginia, in May 2017.

Tangier Island in Chesapeake Bay has lost two-thirds of its landmass since

1850. Now, the 1.2 square mile island is suffering from floods and erosion and
is slowly sinking. A <a

href="https://www.nature.com/articles/srep17890"

target="_blank">paper</a> published in the journal

Scientific Reports states that "the citizens of Tangier may become among

the first climate change refugees in the continental

USA."](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Sea water collects in front of a home in Tangier, Virginia, in May 2017.

Tangier Island in Chesapeake Bay has lost two-thirds of its landmass since

1850. Now, the 1.2 square mile island is suffering from floods and erosion and
is slowly sinking. A <a

href="https://www.nature.com/articles/srep17890"

target="_blank">paper</a> published in the journal

Scientific Reports states that "the citizens of Tangier may become among

the first climate change refugees in the continental

USA."](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170608145748-gettyimages-691359272-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Virginia - Sea water collects in front of a home in Tangier, Virginia, in May
2017. Tangier Island in Chesapeake Bay has lost two-thirds of its landmass
since 1850. Now, the 1.2 square mile island is suffering from floods and
erosion and is slowly sinking. A paper published in the journal Scientific
Reports states that "the citizens of Tangier may become among the first
climate change refugees in the continental USA."

Hide Caption

2 of 14

![The Pasterze glacier is Austria's largest and it's shrinking

rapidly: the sign on the trail indicates where the foot of the glacier reached

in 2015, a year before this photo was taken. The European Environmental Agency

<a href="https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-

maps/indicators/glaciers-2/assessment"

target="_blank">predicts</a> the volume of European

glaciers will decline by between 22 percent and 89 percent by 2100, depending

on the future intensity of greenhouse gases.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![The Pasterze glacier is Austria's largest and it's shrinking

rapidly: the sign on the trail indicates where the foot of the glacier reached

in 2015, a year before this photo was taken. The European Environmental Agency

<a href="https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-

maps/indicators/glaciers-2/assessment"

target="_blank">predicts</a> the volume of European

glaciers will decline by between 22 percent and 89 percent by 2100, depending

on the future intensity of greenhouse gases.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170602110812-gettyimages-597890008-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Austria - The Pasterze glacier is Austria's largest and it's shrinking
rapidly: the sign on the trail indicates where the foot of the glacier reached
in 2015, a year before this photo was taken. The European Environmental Agency
predicts the volume of European glaciers will decline by between 22 percent
and 89 percent by 2100, depending on the future intensity of greenhouse gases.

Hide Caption

3 of 14

![A NASA research aircraft flies over retreating glaciers on the Upper Baffin

Bay coast of Greenland. Scientists say the Arctic is one of the regions hit

hardest by climate change.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![A NASA research aircraft flies over retreating glaciers on the Upper Baffin

Bay coast of Greenland. Scientists say the Arctic is one of the regions hit

hardest by climate change.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170420185552-05-arctic-nasa-cnnphotos-

super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Greenland - A NASA research aircraft flies over retreating glaciers on the
Upper Baffin Bay coast of Greenland. Scientists say the Arctic is one of the
regions hit hardest by climate change.

Hide Caption

4 of 14

![A wooden pole that had been driven into the ice the year before now stands

exposed as the Aletsch glacier melts and sinks at a rate of about 10-13 meters

per year near Bettmeralp, Switzerland.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![A wooden pole that had been driven into the ice the year before now stands

exposed as the Aletsch glacier melts and sinks at a rate of about 10-13 meters

per year near Bettmeralp, Switzerland.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170602110709-gettyimages-597888462-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Switzerland - A wooden pole that had been driven into the ice the year before
now stands exposed as the Aletsch glacier melts and sinks at a rate of about
10-13 meters per year near Bettmeralp, Switzerland.

Hide Caption

5 of 14

![In the Mississippi Delta, trees are withering away because of rising

saltwater, creating "<a

href="http://edition.cnn.com/2017/04/20/us/louisiana-climate-change-

skeptics/index.html">Ghost

Forests</a>."](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![In the Mississippi Delta, trees are withering away because of rising

saltwater, creating "<a

href="http://edition.cnn.com/2017/04/20/us/louisiana-climate-change-

skeptics/index.html">Ghost

Forests</a>."](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170414105259-louisiana-

climate-change-ghost-forest-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Louisiana - In the Mississippi Delta, trees are withering away because of
rising saltwater, creating "Ghost Forests."

Hide Caption

6 of 14

![A street is flooded in Sun Valley, Southern California in February 2017.

Powerful storms have swept Southern California after years of severe drought,

in a "drought-to-deluge" cycle that some <a

href="http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-record-

rains-20170410-story.html" target="_blank">believe</a>

is consistent with the consequences of global

warming.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![A street is flooded in Sun Valley, Southern California in February 2017.

Powerful storms have swept Southern California after years of severe drought,

in a "drought-to-deluge" cycle that some <a

href="http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-record-

rains-20170410-story.html" target="_blank">believe</a>

is consistent with the consequences of global

warming.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170608145722-gettyimages-642478962-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

California - A street is flooded in Sun Valley, Southern California in
February 2017. Powerful storms have swept Southern California after years of
severe drought, in a "drought-to-deluge" cycle that some believe is consistent
with the consequences of global warming.

Hide Caption

7 of 14

![The carcass of a dead cow lies in the Black Umfolozi River, dry from the

effects of a severe drought, in Nongoma district north west from Durban, in

November 2015. South Africa ranks as the 30th driest country in the world and

is considered a water-scarce region. A highly variable climate causes uneven

distribution of rainfall, making droughts even more

extreme.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![The carcass of a dead cow lies in the Black Umfolozi River, dry from the

effects of a severe drought, in Nongoma district north west from Durban, in

November 2015. South Africa ranks as the 30th driest country in the world and

is considered a water-scarce region. A highly variable climate causes uneven

distribution of rainfall, making droughts even more

extreme.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170602110646-gettyimages-496398886-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

South Africa - The carcass of a dead cow lies in the Black Umfolozi River, dry
from the effects of a severe drought, in Nongoma district north west from
Durban, in November 2015. South Africa ranks as the 30th driest country in the
world and is considered a water-scarce region. A highly variable climate
causes uneven distribution of rainfall, making droughts even more extreme.

Hide Caption

8 of 14

![A gigantic cloud of dust known as "Haboob" advances over

Sudan's capital, Khartoum. Moving like a thick wall, it carries sand and

dust burying homes, while increasing evaporation in a region that's

struggling to preserve water supplies. <a

href="http://edition.cnn.com/2016/12/07/africa/sudan-climate-

change/index.html">Experts say</a> that without quick

intervention, parts of the African country -- one of the most vulnerable in

the world -- could become uninhabitable as a result of climate

change.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![A gigantic cloud of dust known as "Haboob" advances over

Sudan's capital, Khartoum. Moving like a thick wall, it carries sand and

dust burying homes, while increasing evaporation in a region that's

struggling to preserve water supplies. <a

href="http://edition.cnn.com/2016/12/07/africa/sudan-climate-

change/index.html">Experts say</a> that without quick

intervention, parts of the African country -- one of the most vulnerable in

the world -- could become uninhabitable as a result of climate

change.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/161130101331-sudan-climate-change-

haboob-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Sudan - A gigantic cloud of dust known as "Haboob" advances over Sudan's
capital, Khartoum. Moving like a thick wall, it carries sand and dust burying
homes, while increasing evaporation in a region that's struggling to preserve
water supplies. Experts say that without quick intervention, parts of the
African country -- one of the most vulnerable in the world -- could become
uninhabitable as a result of climate change.

Hide Caption

9 of 14

![Low tide reveals the extent of accelerated erosion shown by the amount of

exposed beach rocks on Maafushi beach in the Maldives. This is the world's

lowest-lying country, with no part lying more than six feet above sea level.

The island nation's future is under threat from anticipated global sea

level rise, with many of its islands already suffering from coastal

erosion.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Low tide reveals the extent of accelerated erosion shown by the amount of

exposed beach rocks on Maafushi beach in the Maldives. This is the world's

lowest-lying country, with no part lying more than six feet above sea level.

The island nation's future is under threat from anticipated global sea

level rise, with many of its islands already suffering from coastal

erosion.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170602110909-gettyimages-621773488-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Maldives - Low tide reveals the extent of accelerated erosion shown by the
amount of exposed beach rocks on Maafushi beach in the Maldives. This is the
world's lowest-lying country, with no part lying more than six feet above sea
level. The island nation's future is under threat from anticipated global sea
level rise, with many of its islands already suffering from coastal erosion.

Hide Caption

10 of 14

![Los Glaciares National Park, part of the third largest ice field in the

world, on November 27, 2015 in Santa Cruz Province, Argentina. The majority of

the almost 50 large glaciers in the park have been retreating during the past

50 years due to warming temperatures, according to the European Space Agency

\(ESA\).](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Los Glaciares National Park, part of the third largest ice field in the

world, on November 27, 2015 in Santa Cruz Province, Argentina. The majority of

the almost 50 large glaciers in the park have been retreating during the past

50 years due to warming temperatures, according to the European Space Agency

\(ESA\).](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/160114115050-patagonia-glaciers-

super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Argentina - Los Glaciares National Park, part of the third largest ice field
in the world, on November 27, 2015 in Santa Cruz Province, Argentina. The
majority of the almost 50 large glaciers in the park have been retreating
during the past 50 years due to warming temperatures, according to the
European Space Agency (ESA).

Hide Caption

11 of 14

![A boy from the remote Turkana tribe in Northern Kenya walks across a dried

up river near Lodwar, Kenya. Millions of people across Africa are facing a

critical shortage of water and food, a situation made worse by climate change.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![A boy from the remote Turkana tribe in Northern Kenya walks across a dried

up river near Lodwar, Kenya. Millions of people across Africa are facing a

critical shortage of water and food, a situation made worse by climate change.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170602114607-gettyimages-93066200-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Kenya - A boy from the remote Turkana tribe in Northern Kenya walks across a
dried up river near Lodwar, Kenya. Millions of people across Africa are facing
a critical shortage of water and food, a situation made worse by climate
change.

Hide Caption

12 of 14

![An Indian farmer in a dried up cotton field in the southern Indian state of

Telangana, in April 2016. Much of India is <a

href="http://edition.cnn.com/2016/05/04/asia/gallery/india-drought-

crisis/index.html">reeling</a> from a heat wave and severe

drought conditions that have decimated crops, killed livestock and left at

least 330 million people without enough water for their daily

needs.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![An Indian farmer in a dried up cotton field in the southern Indian state of

Telangana, in April 2016. Much of India is <a

href="http://edition.cnn.com/2016/05/04/asia/gallery/india-drought-

crisis/index.html">reeling</a> from a heat wave and severe

drought conditions that have decimated crops, killed livestock and left at

least 330 million people without enough water for their daily

needs.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170608145538-gettyimages-524092610-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

India - An Indian farmer in a dried up cotton field in the southern Indian
state of Telangana, in April 2016. Much of India is reeling from a heat wave
and severe drought conditions that have decimated crops, killed livestock and
left at least 330 million people without enough water for their daily needs.

Hide Caption

13 of 14

![Strawberries lost due to a fungus that experts report is caused by climate

change in La Tigra, Honduras, in September 2016.  According to

Germanwatch's Global Climate Risk Index, Honduras ranks among the

countries most affected by climate change.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![Strawberries lost due to a fungus that experts report is caused by climate

change in La Tigra, Honduras, in September 2016.  According to

Germanwatch's Global Climate Risk Index, Honduras ranks among the

countries most affected by climate change.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170608145643-gettyimages-612943120-super-169.jpg)

Photos: The effects of climate change on the world

Honduras - Strawberries lost due to a fungus that experts report is caused by
climate change in La Tigra, Honduras, in September 2016. According to
Germanwatch's Global Climate Risk Index, Honduras ranks among the countries
most affected by climate change.

Hide Caption

14 of 14

![miami beach flood](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170413165536-miami-

beach-flood-

small-11.jpg)![GettyImages-691359272](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170608145748-gettyimages-691359272-small-11.jpg)![GettyImages-597890008](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170602110812-gettyimages-597890008-small-11.jpg)![05

arctic nasa

cnnphotos](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170420185552-05-arctic-nasa-

cnnphotos-

small-11.jpg)![GettyImages-597888462](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170602110709-gettyimages-597888462-small-11.jpg)![Louisiana

Climate Change Ghost

Forest](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170414105259-louisiana-climate-

change-ghost-forest-

small-11.jpg)![GettyImages-642478962](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170608145722-gettyimages-642478962-small-11.jpg)![GettyImages-496398886](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170602110646-gettyimages-496398886-small-11.jpg)![Sudan

climate change haboob](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/161130101331-sudan-

climate-change-haboob-

small-11.jpg)![GettyImages-621773488](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170602110909-gettyimages-621773488-small-11.jpg)![Patagonia

glaciers](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/160114115050-patagonia-glaciers-

small-11.jpg)![GettyImages-93066200](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170602114607-gettyimages-93066200-small-11.jpg)![GettyImages-524092610](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170608145538-gettyimages-524092610-small-11.jpg)![GettyImages-612943120](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170608145643-gettyimages-612943120-small-11.jpg)

So while scientists are right to say the Larsen C iceberg won't change global
sea levels in a literal and immediate sense, the big picture may be less rosy
and simplistic.

"Floating ice doesn't change sea level at all," Trenberth said, "but the
consequences of this may well end up increasing sea level quite substantially
in the long term."

Already, global sea levels are up about 8 centimeters since 1992, largely
because of global warming, he said. And they're rising at a rate of 3.4
millimeters per year.

### 5. But it's clear that melting Antarctic ice is a multigenerational time

bomb.

Those numbers probably sound small. They are small. Who cares about a few
millimeters of difference in the tides?

But this reveals yet another failing in the way most of us are talking about
the melting of the world's ice: We must force ourselves to think on bigger
timescales.

We should think about New York, Miami, Shanghai and other coastal cities
threatened by rising seas in our lifetimes. I can't write about this issue
without remembering my trip to the Marshall Islands, a tiny island nation in
the Pacific that stands to lose all of its territory -- and language, culture
and history -- if temperatures rise just 2 degrees Celsius, which seems
increasingly likely.

But we must also consider future generations. What kind of world are we
dumping on them?

When you think in terms of decades or centuries, the most vulnerable part of
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet could raise global sea levels as much as 3
meters, Rignot told me. And the larger East Antarctic Ice Sheet, in the very
long term, could lift tides 19 meters, he said. That's more than 62 feet, or a
building that's at least six stories tall.

"The actions we're taking now actually have consequences 50 years from now,
100 years from now -- and 200 years from now," Trenberth said.

When we see trillion-ton ice chunks falling off a continent, that's well worth
remembering.

![<strong>Ever-changing landscape:</strong><em> Adventure

photographer Ben Adkison tells CNN about his work on sea ice safety and

logistics at US Antarctic research center McMurdo Station: </em>Cracks

in the sea ice can form and change throughout the season, sometimes creating

pressure ridges where water can break through. United States Antarctic Program

staffers regularly check these cracks to ensure it is safe to drive vehicles

over them. <br

/>](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>Ever-changing landscape:</strong><em> Adventure

photographer Ben Adkison tells CNN about his work on sea ice safety and

logistics at US Antarctic research center McMurdo Station: </em>Cracks

in the sea ice can form and change throughout the season, sometimes creating

pressure ridges where water can break through. United States Antarctic Program

staffers regularly check these cracks to ensure it is safe to drive vehicles

over them. <br

/>](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103754-antarctica-sea-

ice-1-general-sea-ice-super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**Ever-changing landscape:** _Adventure photographer Ben Adkison tells CNN
about his work on sea ice safety and logistics at US Antarctic research center
McMurdo Station:_ Cracks in the sea ice can form and change throughout the
season, sometimes creating pressure ridges where water can break through.
United States Antarctic Program staffers regularly check these cracks to
ensure it is safe to drive vehicles over them.

Hide Caption

1 of 11

![<strong>Nilas ice: </strong>Late in the fall \(April and May\)

the sea ice begins to freeze on the surface of the water.  Known as nilas ice,

this glassy smooth surface initially looks black and is just a few inches

thick. As the ice continues to grow, until October or November, it becomes

whiter in color and can be up to eight feet

thick.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>Nilas ice: </strong>Late in the fall \(April and May\)

the sea ice begins to freeze on the surface of the water.  Known as nilas ice,

this glassy smooth surface initially looks black and is just a few inches

thick. As the ice continues to grow, until October or November, it becomes

whiter in color and can be up to eight feet

thick.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103811-antarctica-sea-

ice-2-early-formation-super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**Nilas ice:** Late in the fall (April and May) the sea ice begins to freeze
on the surface of the water. Known as nilas ice, this glassy smooth surface
initially looks black and is just a few inches thick. As the ice continues to
grow, until October or November, it becomes whiter in color and can be up to
eight feet thick.

Hide Caption

2 of 11

![<strong>Underneath the ice: </strong>The world beneath the sea

ice is one of the least explored landscapes on Earth. The under-surface is

covered in jagged ice crystals called platelet ice. They're formed when

ice crystals floating in the water and freeze to the ice surface in the same

way frost or dew forms on foggy

mornings.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>Underneath the ice: </strong>The world beneath the sea

ice is one of the least explored landscapes on Earth. The under-surface is

covered in jagged ice crystals called platelet ice. They're formed when

ice crystals floating in the water and freeze to the ice surface in the same

way frost or dew forms on foggy

mornings.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103833-antarctica-sea-

ice-3-underneath-the-ice-super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**Underneath the ice:** The world beneath the sea ice is one of the least
explored landscapes on Earth. The under-surface is covered in jagged ice
crystals called platelet ice. They're formed when ice crystals floating in the
water and freeze to the ice surface in the same way frost or dew forms on
foggy mornings.

Hide Caption

3 of 11

![<strong>Icebergs: </strong>Icebergs are pieces of freshwater ice

that break away from a glacier or ice shelf. While often seen by cruise ship

travelers further north of McMurdo Sound, the pictured icebergs are grounded

and held in by the sea ice. This one is four miles long and has been in the

same spot for

years.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>Icebergs: </strong>Icebergs are pieces of freshwater ice

that break away from a glacier or ice shelf. While often seen by cruise ship

travelers further north of McMurdo Sound, the pictured icebergs are grounded

and held in by the sea ice. This one is four miles long and has been in the

same spot for

years.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103852-antarctica-sea-

ice-4-icebergs-super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**Icebergs:** Icebergs are pieces of freshwater ice that break away from a
glacier or ice shelf. While often seen by cruise ship travelers further north
of McMurdo Sound, the pictured icebergs are grounded and held in by the sea
ice. This one is four miles long and has been in the same spot for years.

Hide Caption

4 of 11

![<strong>Penguins:</strong> Emperor \(pictured\) and Adelie

Penguins wander along the sea ice edge during the summer season. The National

Science Foundation funds researchers who study how these birds are affected by

climate change.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>Penguins:</strong> Emperor \(pictured\) and Adelie

Penguins wander along the sea ice edge during the summer season. The National

Science Foundation funds researchers who study how these birds are affected by

climate change.  ](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103913-antarctica-

sea-ice-5-penguins-super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**Penguins:** Emperor (pictured) and Adelie Penguins wander along the sea ice
edge during the summer season. The National Science Foundation funds
researchers who study how these birds are affected by climate change.

Hide Caption

5 of 11

![<strong>Seals:</strong> Weddell seals populate McMurdo Sound

and, from a distance, can resemble large slugs. They keep holes open along sea

ice cracks so that they return to the water when needed. The seals can dive to

depths of up to 2,000 feet.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>Seals:</strong> Weddell seals populate McMurdo Sound

and, from a distance, can resemble large slugs. They keep holes open along sea

ice cracks so that they return to the water when needed. The seals can dive to

depths of up to 2,000 feet.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103930-antarctica-sea-ice-6-seals-

super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**Seals:** Weddell seals populate McMurdo Sound and, from a distance, can
resemble large slugs. They keep holes open along sea ice cracks so that they
return to the water when needed. The seals can dive to depths of up to 2,000
feet.

Hide Caption

6 of 11

![<strong>Logistics:</strong> United States Antarctic Program

researchers and support staffers use different types of tracked vehicles to

safely travel along the sea ice. A PistenBully is used to assess sea ice

routes for safe

travel.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>Logistics:</strong> United States Antarctic Program

researchers and support staffers use different types of tracked vehicles to

safely travel along the sea ice. A PistenBully is used to assess sea ice

routes for safe

travel.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103949-antarctica-sea-

ice-7-logistics-super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**Logistics:** United States Antarctic Program researchers and support
staffers use different types of tracked vehicles to safely travel along the
sea ice. A PistenBully is used to assess sea ice routes for safe travel.

Hide Caption

7 of 11

![<strong>Edge science: </strong>While much of the research is

based on the fast ice or close to shore, certain projects require scientists

to take samples at the ice edge. Specialized restraint systems are in place to

keep these two scientists out of the water as they take plankton samples to

study the effects of ocean acidification. Plankton is a key member of the

ocean food chain so it's important to understand how climate change is

affecting the population. <br

/>](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>Edge science: </strong>While much of the research is

based on the fast ice or close to shore, certain projects require scientists

to take samples at the ice edge. Specialized restraint systems are in place to

keep these two scientists out of the water as they take plankton samples to

study the effects of ocean acidification. Plankton is a key member of the

ocean food chain so it's important to understand how climate change is

affecting the population. <br

/>](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103104008-antarctica-sea-

ice-8-edge-science-super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**Edge science:** While much of the research is based on the fast ice or close
to shore, certain projects require scientists to take samples at the ice edge.
Specialized restraint systems are in place to keep these two scientists out of
the water as they take plankton samples to study the effects of ocean
acidification. Plankton is a key member of the ocean food chain so it's
important to understand how climate change is affecting the population.

Hide Caption

8 of 11

![<strong>Melting sea ice:</strong> As temperatures rise and the

sea ice weakens, the sea ice eventually breaks up into ice floes and gets

carried north where it eventually melts. During January or February the ice in

front of McMurdo Station can break up and disappear in less than a

day.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>Melting sea ice:</strong> As temperatures rise and the

sea ice weakens, the sea ice eventually breaks up into ice floes and gets

carried north where it eventually melts. During January or February the ice in

front of McMurdo Station can break up and disappear in less than a

day.](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103104026-antarctica-sea-ice-9-sea-

ice-deformation-super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**Melting sea ice:** As temperatures rise and the sea ice weakens, the sea ice
eventually breaks up into ice floes and gets carried north where it eventually
melts. During January or February the ice in front of McMurdo Station can
break up and disappear in less than a day.

Hide Caption

9 of 11

![<strong>Supplies:</strong> In late January each year, a supply

ship docks at McMurdo, bringing a year's worth of food, supplies, and

equipment too large to carry on cargo planes. An icebreaker breaks a channel

through the sea ice to allow the ship safe passage to McMurdo. A fuel tanker

will also arrive to offload millions of gallons of gas, diesel and jet fuel to

support science logistics at the center.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>Supplies:</strong> In late January each year, a supply

ship docks at McMurdo, bringing a year's worth of food, supplies, and

equipment too large to carry on cargo planes. An icebreaker breaks a channel

through the sea ice to allow the ship safe passage to McMurdo. A fuel tanker

will also arrive to offload millions of gallons of gas, diesel and jet fuel to

support science logistics at the center.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103717-antarctica-sea-ice-10-ship-

super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**Supplies:** In late January each year, a supply ship docks at McMurdo,
bringing a year's worth of food, supplies, and equipment too large to carry on
cargo planes. An icebreaker breaks a channel through the sea ice to allow the
ship safe passage to McMurdo. A fuel tanker will also arrive to offload
millions of gallons of gas, diesel and jet fuel to support science logistics
at the center.

Hide Caption

10 of 11

![<strong>End of season:</strong> The main research season starts

in October and ends in February, taking advantage of the sunlight and warmer

temperatures. The station holds up to 1,000 people each summer, but only 150

or so people stay through winter. The time is used to repair vehicles and

other equipment, check and organize all the supplies from the resupply ship

and ready the station for the new season. Pictured: A frozen starfish at Cape

Evans on Ross Island.

](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhEAAJAJEAAAAAAP///////wAAACH5BAEAAAIALAAAAAAQAAkAAAIKlI+py+0Po5yUFQA7)

![<strong>End of season:</strong> The main research season starts

in October and ends in February, taking advantage of the sunlight and warmer

temperatures. The station holds up to 1,000 people each summer, but only 150

or so people stay through winter. The time is used to repair vehicles and

other equipment, check and organize all the supplies from the resupply ship

and ready the station for the new season. Pictured: A frozen starfish at Cape

Evans on Ross Island.

](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103737-antarctica-sea-ice-11-end-of-

season-super-169.jpg)

Photos:

**End of season:** The main research season starts in October and ends in
February, taking advantage of the sunlight and warmer temperatures. The
station holds up to 1,000 people each summer, but only 150 or so people stay
through winter. The time is used to repair vehicles and other equipment, check
and organize all the supplies from the resupply ship and ready the station for
the new season. Pictured: A frozen starfish at Cape Evans on Ross Island.

Hide Caption

11 of 11

![Antarctica sea ice 1_General Sea

Ice](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103754-antarctica-sea-

ice-1-general-sea-ice-small-11.jpg)![Antarctica sea ice 2_Early

Formation](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103811-antarctica-sea-

ice-2-early-formation-small-11.jpg)![Antarctica sea ice 3_underneath the

ice](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103833-antarctica-sea-

ice-3-underneath-the-ice-small-11.jpg)![Antarctica sea ice

4_icebergs](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103852-antarctica-sea-

ice-4-icebergs-small-11.jpg)![Antarctica sea ice

5_Penguins](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103913-antarctica-sea-

ice-5-penguins-small-11.jpg)![Antarctica sea ice

6_Seals](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103930-antarctica-sea-

ice-6-seals-small-11.jpg)![Antarctica sea ice

7_Logistics](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103949-antarctica-sea-

ice-7-logistics-small-11.jpg)![Antarctica sea ice 8_Edge

Science](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103104008-antarctica-sea-

ice-8-edge-science-small-11.jpg)![Antarctica sea ice 9_sea ice

deformation](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103104026-antarctica-sea-

ice-9-sea-ice-deformation-small-11.jpg)![Antarctica sea ice

10_ship](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103717-antarctica-sea-

ice-10-ship-small-11.jpg)![Antarctica sea ice 11_End of

Season](//cdn.cnn.com/cnnnext/dam/assets/170103103737-antarctica-sea-

ice-11-end-of-season-small-11.jpg)

  *   *   * Home

  * World

    1. US
    2. Africa
    3. Americas
    4. Asia
    5. Australia
    6. China
    7. Europe
    8. Middle East
    9. India
    10. UK
  * US Politics

    1. 45
    2. Congress
    3. Supreme Court
    4. Facts First
    5. 2020 Election
  * Business

    1. Markets
    2. Tech
    3. Media
    4. Success
    5. Perspectives
    6. Video
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_entertainment.png)

    1. Stars
    2. Screen
    3. Binge
    4. Culture
    5. Media
  * Tech

    1. Innovate
    2. Gadget
    3. Mission: Ahead
    4. Upstarts
    5. Business Evolved
    6. Work Transformed
    7. Innovative Cities
  * Sport

    1. Football
    2. Tennis
    3. Equestrian
    4. Golf
    5. Skiing
    6. Horse Racing
    7. Formula E
    8. F1
    9. Sailing
    10. Rugby
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_travel.png)

    1. Destinations
    2. Food & Drink
    3. Play
    4. Stay
    5. Videos
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_style_new.png)

    1. Arts
    2. Design
    3. Fashion
    4. Architecture
    5. Luxury
    6. Autos
    7. Video
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/logos/menu_health.png)

    1. Food
    2. Fitness
    3. Wellness
    4. Parenting
    5. Live Longer
  * Features

    1. Freedom Project
    2. Impact Your World
    3. Inside Africa
    4. 2 degrees
    5. CNN Heroes
    6. All Features
  * Video

    1. Video news
    2. Feature shows
    3. HLN
    4. TV shows
    5. TV schedule
    6. Faces of CNN Worldwide
    7. CNNVR
  * ![](//cdn.cnn.com/cnn/.e1mo/img/4.0/vr/vr_new_asset.png)

    1. How To Watch VR
    2. Archives
  * More…

    1. Weather
    2. CNN Profiles
    3. Leadership
    4. Pressroom
    5. Partner sites
    6. Work for CNN

International Edition

  * Set edition preference:
  * U.S.
  * International
  * Confirm
  * U.S.
  * International
  * Arabic
  * Español

(C) 2019 Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. All Rights
Reserved.  
CNN Sans ™ & (C) 2016 Cable News Network.

  * Terms of Use
  * Privacy Policy
  * Accessibility & CC
  * AdChoices
  * Modern Slavery Act Statement
  * Advertise with us
  * About us
  * CNN Store
  * Newsletters
  * Transcripts
  * License Footage
  * CNN Newsource

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-D1yc5zQgjmqr5.gif?labels=noscript%3ANo%20Labels%20Set)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

