

Using the title "Dr."

< >>

**losemygrip** :  
The constant use of "Dr." by Ph.D.s IS pretentious. Miss Manners has addressed
this. Outside of the university, you do not use the "Dr." title. This is so
that in an emergency situation, a medical doctor can be located more easily.
I'm serious--that's what she says, and I think she's right. You can be "Dr."
on campus to your students. You must NEVER insist upon this title being used,
or get in a huff because it isn't. That's the height of pettiness and egotism.

I find that in most fields people don't care about this title, or they may
even feel awkward with it. Most commonly I see this insistence on "Dr." with
people in Education. "Dr. Lisa Phillips, Ed.D." Not only pretentious, but
redundant as well. Such a fine example for teachers-in-training.

I remember years ago when I worked in hotel reservations. A woman called up
all in an uproar because, "You misspelled my name on my reservations. Thats
DOCTOR Lisa Phillips!!!!" Yep, she was an Ed.D. If she only knew how my eyes
rolled and how we reservationists all made fun of her and those pretentious
clods like her . . . .

As far as the timing of when you may be referred to as "Dr." in academe, it
does vary by institution. One of my mentors went to Harvard, and he said that
there it was the term used for Ph.D. candidates pre-defense. I was writing a
letter to a Harvard faculty member about a research question and he said NOT
to address him as "Dr." but as "Professor." Personally, I feel you should only
receive the title after your degree is actually posted and you've graduated.

**threefive** :  
Quote

The constant use of "Dr." by Ph.D.s IS pretentious.

And so is the constant use of "Dr." by M.D.s. Afterall, they pilfered the
title from academics.

If an M.D. is going to insist that I call him Dr. So-and-so, then he/she
better AT LEAST call me Mr. Five. I don't necessarily need the "Dr.", but if
we're going to be formal, then it's going to be both ways.

Quote

This is so that in an emergency situation, a medical doctor can be located
more easily.

This is a horrible justification. Exactly how does my use of a title properly
earned and specifically defined for centuries impede the location of an M.D.?
I just can't imagine someone saying "No, don't call 911. I'll just run
upstairs and get Dr. Five instead."

However, it is pretentious to get bent out of shape if your hotel reservation
isn't properly titled. Or if the cashier, lord forbid, calls you Mr. instead
of Dr. However, I find these situations more common among MDs (and, yes, EdDs)
than PhDs.

**chaud** :  
I've never heard anyone correct someone regarding their title. Ever. Not EdDs
or PhDs. Usually, someone else introduces them as "Dr. So-and-so." When this
happens to me, I hold out my hand to shake hands and say my first name.

Of course, when salespeople call my house and ask if I'm Mrs.
Husband'sLastName, I tell them there's no one here by that name. I'm not Mrs.
anything and his name isn't my name.

I'm a stickler for the rules. I would not use the title until the degree had
been conferred, particularly not in letters of application for TT positions.
The real Drs will find it annoying. Make it clear on your CV: Dissertation
Successfully Defended, Dec 07; Degree to be Conferred, June 08.

**desert_rat** :  
I never use the title outside class. However, here is a refreshing (true)
story: I know (and have been a patient of) an orthopedic surgeon. He and all
his office staff ALWAYS call me "Dr. Desert_Rat".

It's kinda nice...

**hollow_man** :  
Apparently the anti-snobbery police can be just as obnoxious as the snobs
themselves...

Navigation

[0] Message Index

[#] Next page

[*] Previous page

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

