

↓

# After Abortion

##

![After Abortion](https://afterabortion.org/wp-

content/uploads/2015/05/cropped-untitledBanner.png)

Home Menu ↓

Skip to primary content

Skip to secondary content

  * About Us
    * Elliot Institute Brochure
    * About Our Director
    * Ending Abortion With Compassion
    * Elliot Anniversary 30 Year Report
    * How to Support Our Work
  * Submit Articles
  * Testimonies
  * Post-Abortion Review
  * Articles
    * Commentary
    * Featured
    * Healing
    * Men and Abortion
    * Special Reports
  * Resources
    * Books
    * Aborted Women, Silent No More
    * Detrimental Effects of Abortion
    * Forbidden Grief
    * Duelo Prohibido
    * Giving Sorrow Words
    * The Jericho Plan
    * Making Abortion Rare
    * Reversing the Gender Gap
    * Victims and Victors
    * All Our Books
    * Fact Sheets and Flyers
    * Hope and Healing
    * YouTube AbortionRisks Channel
  * News
    * News Releases & Articles
    * Elliot Institute E-Newsletter Archives
    * Special Reports
  * Research
    * Abortion Mortality Rates
    * Physical Risks
    * Emotional Risks
    * Psychological Risk Factors
    * Psychological Risks - List
    * Overview of Psych Risks
    * Most Studies Show Risks
  * Risk Factors
  * Healing
    * Help After Abortion
    * Help During Pregnancy

### Post navigation

<- Only Some Voices Count

Move to Fund Abortions for Rape Victims in the Military Abandons Women ->

# Abortion Risks | Abortion Complications | Abortion Dangers | Abortion Side

Effects

Posted on December 19, 2012 by EI

Printable Fact Sheets  
Psychological Complications  
More articles on abortion complications

## Physical Dangers Associated With Abortion

Approximately 10% of women undergoing induced abortion suffer from immediate
complications, of which one-fifth (2%) were considered major.19 However the
majority of complications take time to develop and will not be apparent for
days, months or even years.

Negative psychological reactions to abortion are more common than physical
complications. These are described in a later section.

The major physical risks and complications of abortion are described below.
Citations to the medical literature regarding each danger or risk are included
as end notes at the bottom of this page.

###### **ELEVATED RISK OF DEATH**

![](https://afterabortion.org/wp-

content/uploads/1999/11/totaldeaths-300x196.jpg)

According to the best record based study of deaths following pregnancy and
abortion, a 1997 government funded study in Finland, women who abort are
approximately four times more likely to die in the following year than women
who carry their pregnancies to term. In addition, women who carry to term are
only half as likely to die as women who were not pregnant.16 _(_ _Click here_
_for more details on this important study.)_

![](https://afterabortion.org/wp-content/uploads/1999/11/natural1-300x184.jpg)

![](https://afterabortion.org/wp-content/uploads/1999/11/suicide-300x205.jpg)

The Finland researchers found that compared to women who carried to term,
women who aborted in the year prior to their deaths were 60 percent more
likely to die of natural causes, seven times more likely to die of suicide,
four times more likely to die of injuries related to accidents, and 14 times
more likely to die from homicide.

Researchers believe the higher rate of deaths related to accidents and
homicide may be linked to higher rates of suicidal or risk-taking behavior.16
(Click here for details on the latest research regarding abortion associated
deaths.)

The leading causes of abortion related maternal deaths within a week of the
surgery are hemorrhage, infection, embolism, anesthesia, and undiagnosed
ectopic pregnancies. Legal abortion is reported as the fifth leading cause of
maternal death in the United States, though in fact it is recognized that most
abortion-related deaths are not officially reported as such.2 _(_ _Click here_
_for more details on the underreporting of abortion related deaths in the
U.S.)_

![](https://afterabortion.org/wp-

content/uploads/2012/09/DenmarkMortalityRates-300x153.jpg)

![](https://afterabortion.org/wp-

content/uploads/2012/09/Deaths2Denmark2-300x217.jpg)

Two studies of the entire population of women in Denmark published in 2012
have shown similar results. The first found that the risk of death following
abortion remains higher in each of the first ten years following the abortion.
The second found that the risk of death increases with each abortion, 45%
after one abortion, 114% after two abortions, and 192 percent after three or
more abortions.

For a complete review of the literature see Deaths associated with abortion
compared to childbirth: a review of new and old data and the medical and legal
implications (2004).

###### **CERVICAL, OVARIAN, AND LIVER CANCER**

Women with a history of one abortion face a 2.3 times higher risk of having
cervical cancer, compared to women with no history of abortion. Women with two
or more abortions face a 4.92 relative risk. Similar elevated risks of
subsequent ovarian and liver cancer have also been linked to single and
multiple abortions. These increased cancer rates for post-aborted women may be
linked to the unnatural disruption of the hormonal changes which accompany
pregnancy and untreated cervical damage or to increased stress and the
negative impact of stress on the immune system.4

###### **UTERINE PERFORATION**

Between 2 and 3% of all abortion patients may suffer perforation of their
uterus, yet most of these injuries will remain undiagnosed and untreated
unless laparoscopic visualization is performed.5 Such an examination may be
useful when beginning an abortion malpractice suit. The risk of uterine
perforation is increased for women who have previously given birth and for
those who receive general anesthesia at the time of the abortion.(6) Uterine
damage may result in complications in later pregnancies and may eventually
evolve into problems which require a hysterectomy, which itself may result in
a number of additional complications and injuries including osteoporosis.

###### **CERVICAL LACERATIONS**

Significant cervical lacerations requiring sutures occur in at least one
percent of first trimester abortions. Lesser lacerations, or micro fractures,
which would normally not be treated may also result in long term reproductive
damage. Latent post-abortion cervical damage may result in subsequent cervical
incompetence, premature delivery, and complications of labor. The risk of
cervical damage is greater for teenagers, for second trimester abortions, and
when practitioners fail to use laminaria for dilation of the cervix.7

###### **PLACENTA PREVIA**

Abortion increases the risk of placenta previa in later pregnancies (a life
threatening condition for both the mother and her wanted pregnancy) by seven
to fifteen fold. Abnormal development of the placenta due to uterine damage
increases the risk of fetal malformation, perinatal death, and excessive
bleeding during labor.8

###### **SUBSEQUENT PRE-TERM DELIVERIES AND OTHER COMPLICATIONS OF LABOR**

Women who had one, two, or more previous induced abortions are, respectively,
1.89, 2.66, or 2.03 times more likely to have a subsequent pre-term delivery,
compared to women who carry to term. Prior induced abortion not only increased
the risk of premature delivery, it also increased the risk of delayed
delivery. Women who had one, two, or more induced abortions are, respectively,
1.89, 2.61, and 2.23 times more likely to have a post-term delivery (over 42
weeks).17 Pre-term delivery increases the risk of neonatal death and
handicaps.

###### **HANDICAPPED NEWBORNS IN LATER PREGNANCIES**

Abortion is associated with cervical and uterine damage which may increase the
risk of premature delivery, complications of labor and abnormal development of
the placenta in later pregnancies. These reproductive complications are the
leading causes of handicaps among newborns.9

###### **ECTOPIC PREGNANCY**

Abortion is significantly related to an increased risk of subsequent ectopic
pregnancies. Ectopic pregnancies, in turn, are life threatening and may result
in reduced fertility.10

###### **PELVIC INFLAMMATORY DISEASE (PID)**

PID is a potentially life threatening disease which can lead to an increased
risk of ectopic pregnancy and reduced fertility. Of patients who have a
chlamydia infection at the time of the abortion, 23% will develop PID within 4
weeks. Studies have found that 20 to 27% of patients seeking abortion have a
chlamydia infection. Approximately 5% of patients who are not infected by
chlamydia develop PID within 4 weeks after a first trimester abortion. It is
therefore reasonable to expect that abortion providers should screen for and
treat such infections prior to an abortion.11

###### ENDOMETRITIS

Endometritis is a post-abortion risk for all women, but especially for
teenagers, who are 2.5 times more likely than women 20-29 to acquire
endometritis following abortion.12

###### **IMMEDIATE COMPLICATIONS**

Approximately 10% of women undergoing elective abortion will suffer immediate
complications, of which approximately one-fifth (2%) are considered life
threatening. The nine most common major complications which can occur at the
time of an abortion are: infection, excessive bleeding, embolism, ripping or
perforation of the uterus, anesthesia complications, convulsions, hemorrhage,
cervical injury, and endotoxic shock. The most common "minor" complications
include: infection, bleeding, fever, second degree burns, chronic abdominal
pain, vomiting, gastro-intestinal disturbances, and Rh sensitization.13

###### **INCREASED COMPLICATIONS FOR WOMEN SEEKING MULTIPLE ABORTIONS:**

In general, most of the studies cited above reflect risk factors for women who
undergo a single abortion. These same studies show that women who have
multiple abortions face a much greater risk of experiencing these
complications. This point is especially noteworthy since approximately 45% of
all abortions are for repeat aborters.

###### **LOWER GENERAL HEALTH:**

In a survey of 1428 women researchers found that pregnancy loss, and
particularly losses due to induced abortion, was significantly associated with
an overall lower health. Multiple abortions correlated to an even lower
evaluation of "present health." While miscarriage was detrimental to health,
abortion was found to have a greater correlation to poor health. These
findings support previous research which reported that during the year
following an abortion women visited their family doctors 80% more for all
reasons and 180% more for psychosocial reasons. The authors also found that
"if a partner is present and not supportive, the miscarriage rate is more than
double and the abortion rate is four times greater than if he is present and
supportive. If the partner is absent the abortion rate is six times greater."
(15)

This finding is supported by a 1984 study that examined the amount of health
care sought by women during a year before and a year after their induced
abortions. The researchers found that on average, there was an 80 percent
increase in the number of doctor visits and a 180 percent increase in doctor
visits for psychosocial reasons after abortion.18

###### **INCREASED RISK FOR CONTRIBUTING HEALTH RISK FACTORS:**

Abortion is significantly linked to behavioral changes such as promiscuity,
smoking, drug abuse, and eating disorders which all contribute to increased
risks of health problems. For example, promiscuity and abortion are each
linked to increased rates of PID and ectopic pregnancies. Which contributes
most is unclear, but apportionment may be irrelevant if the promiscuity is
itself a reaction to post- abortion trauma or loss of self esteem.

###### **INCREASED DANGERS FROM ABORTION FOR TEENAGERS:**

Teenagers, who account for about 30 percent of all abortions, are also at much
high risk of suffering many abortion related complications. This is true of
both immediate complications, and of long-term reproductive damage.14

The most complete listing of physical dangers associated with abortion can be
found at at **AbortionRisks.org**

* * *

* * *

## **Psychological Risks Associated with Abortion**

Printable Fact Sheets

**REQUIREMENT OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TREATMENT**  
A study of the medical records of 56,741 California medicaid patients revealed
that women who had abortions were _160 percent more likely_ than delivering
women to be hospitalized for psychiatric treatment in the first 90 days
following abortion or delivery. Rates of psychiatric treatment remained
significantly higher for at least four years.1,3

![](https://afterabortion.org/wp-

content/uploads/2011/02/RRinpatient-300x199.jpg)

In a study of post-abortion patients only 8 weeks after their abortion,
researchers found that 44% complained of nervous disorders, 36% had
experienced sleep disturbances, 31% had regrets about their decision, and 11%
had been prescribed psychotropic medicine by their family doctor. (2) A 5 year
retrospective study in two Canadian provinces found significantly greater use
of medical and psychiatric services among women with a history of abortion.
Most significant was the finding that 25% of women who had abortions made
visits to psychiatrists as compared to 3% of the control group. (3) Women who
have had abortions are significantly more likely than others to subsequently
require admission to a psychiatric hospital. At especially high risk are
teenagers, separated or divorced women, and women with a history of more than
one abortion. (4)

Since many post-abortive women use repression as a coping mechanism, there may
be a long period of denial before a woman seeks psychiatric care. These
repressed feelings may cause psychosomatic illnesses and psychiatric or
behavioral in other areas of her life. As a result, some counselors report
that unacknowledged post-abortion distress is the causative factor in many of
their female patients, even though their patients have come to them seeking
therapy for seemingly unrelated problems. (5)

###### **RISK FACTORS**

Researchers have identified a large number of statistically significant risk
factors that identify which women are at greatest risk of experiencing one or
more severe reactions to abortion. The following is list of risk factors
identified by the American Psychological Association Task Force on Mental
Health and Abortion in their 2008 report:

  1. terminating a pregnancy that is wanted or meaningful
  2. perceived pressure from others to terminate a pregnancy
  3. perceived opposition to the abortion from partners, family, and/or friends
  4. lack of perceived social support from others
  5. various personality traits (e.g., low self-esteem, a pessimistic outlook, low-perceived control over life)
  6. a history of mental health problems prior to the pregnancy
  7. feelings of stigma
  8. perceived need for secrecy
  9. exposure to antiabortion picketing
  10. use of avoidance and denial coping strategies
  11. feelings of commitment to the pregnancy
  12. ambivalence about the abortion decision
  13. low perceived ability to cope with the abortion
  14. history of prior abortion
  15. late term abortion
  16. being an adolescent (not an adult)
  17. having a non-elective (therapeutic or coerced) abortion
  18. prior history of abortion (having a second or third abortion, or more)

Please see "Identifying High Risk Abortion Patients" or "Abortion decisions
and the duty to screen: clinical, ethical, and legal implications of
predictive risk factors of post-abortion maladjustment" for a more complete
list of risk factors, including citations to the studies identifying each risk
factor.

###### **SUICIDAL IDEATION AND SUICIDE ATTEMPTS**

Approximately 60 percent of women who experience post-abortion sequelae report
suicidal ideation, with 28 percent actually attempting suicide, of which half
attempted suicide two or more times.(13) ![](https://afterabortion.org/wp-

content/uploads/1999/11/suicide-300x205.jpg)

Researchers in Finland have identified a strong statistical association
between abortion and suicide in a records based study (see figure at the
right). They found that the mean annual suicide rate for all women was 11.3
per 100,000 but the rate for women following abortion was 34.7 per 100,000,
three times higher. The suicide rate associated with birth, by contrast, was
half the rate of all women and less than one-sixth the rate of suicide among
women who had abortions.(13)

Suicide attempts appear to be especially prevalent among post-abortion
teenagers. Numerous other studies have also revealed higher rates of suicide
and suicide attempts associated with abortion.(13)

###### **ALCOHOL AND DRUG ABUSE**

Over twenty studies have linked abortion to increased rates of drug and
alcohol use.1 Abortion is significantly linked with a two fold increased risk
of alcohol abuse among women.(16) Abortion followed by alcohol abuse is linked
to violent behavior, divorce or separation, auto accidents, and job loss.(17)
In addition to the psycho-social costs of such abuse, drug abuse is linked
with increased exposure to HIV/AIDS infections, congenital malformations, and
assaultive behavior. (18)

###### **EATING DISORDERS**

For at least some women, post-abortion stress is associated with eating
disorders such as binge eating, bulimia, and anorexia nervosa. (19)

###### **SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION**

Thirty to fifty percent of the women who experience difficulty adjusting to a
past abortion report experiencing sexual dysfunctions, of both short and long
duration, beginning immediately after their abortions. These problems may
include one or more of the following: loss of pleasure from intercourse,
increased pain, an aversion to sex and/or males in general, or the development
of a promiscuous life-style. (12)

###### **CHILD NEGLECT OR ABUSE**

Abortion is linked with increased depression, violent behavior, alcohol and
drug abuse, replacement pregnancies, and reduced maternal bonding with
children born subsequently. These factors are closely associated with child
abuse and would appear to confirm individual clinical assessments linking
post-abortion trauma with subsequent child abuse. (20)

###### **POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (PTSD or PAS)**

While psychological reactions to abortion fall into many categories, some
women experience all or some of they symptoms of post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD). The lowest incidence rate of PTSD reported following abortion
is 1.5%, which would translate to over 600,000 cases of abortion induced
PTSD.2 Another study found that 14% of American women have all the symptoms of
PTSD and attribute them to their abortions, with as many as 65% reporting
some, but not all symptoms of PTSD.3

Yet another random study found that a minimum of 19% of post-abortion women
suffer from diagnosable post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Approximately
half had many, but not all, symptoms of PTSD, and 20 to 40 percent showed
moderate to high levels of stress and avoidance behavior relative to their
abortion experiences. (6)

PTSD is a psychological dysfunction which results from a traumatic experience
which overwhelms a person's normal defense mechanisms resulting in intense
fear, feelings of helplessness or being trapped, or loss of control. The risk
that an experience will be traumatic is increased when the traumatizing event
is perceived as including threats of physical injury, sexual violation, or the
witnessing of or participation in a violent death. PTSD results when the
traumatic event causes the hyperarousal of "flight or fight" defense
mechanisms. This hyperarousal causes these defense mechanisms to become
disorganized, disconnected from present circumstances, and take on a life of
their own resulting in abnormal behavior and major personality disorders. As
an example of this disconnection of mental functions, some PTSD victim may
experience intense emotion but without clear memory of the event; others may
remember every detail but without emotion; still others may reexperience both
the event and the emotions in intrusive and overwhelming flashback
experiences. (7)

Women may experience abortion as a traumatic event for several reasons. Many
are forced into an unwanted abortions by husbands, boyfriends, parents, or
others. If the woman has repeatedly been a victim of domineering abuse, such
an unwanted abortion may be perceived as the ultimate violation in a life
characterized by abuse. Other women, no matter how compelling the reasons they
have for seeking an abortion, may still perceive the termination of their
pregnancy as the violent killing of their own child. The fear, anxiety, pain,
and guilt associated with the procedure are mixed into this perception of
grotesque and violent death. Still other women, report that the pain of
abortion, inflicted upon them by a masked stranger invading their body, feels
identical to rape. (8) Indeed, researchers have found that women with a
history of sexual assault may experience greater distress during and after an
abortion exactly because of these associations between the two experiences.
(9) When the stressor leading to PTSD is abortion, some clinicians refer to
this as Post-Abortion Syndrome (PAS).

The major symptoms of PTSD are generally classified under three categories:
hyperarousal, intrusion, and constriction.

_Hyperarousal_ is a characteristic of inappropriately and chronically aroused
"fight or flight" defense mechanisms. The person is seemingly on permanent
alert for threats of danger. Symptoms of hyperarousal include: exaggerated
startle responses, anxiety attacks, irritability, outbursts of anger or rage,
aggressive behavior, difficulty concentrating, hypervigilence, difficulty
falling asleep or staying asleep, or physiological reactions upon exposure to
situations that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic experience
(eg. elevated pulse or sweat during a pelvic exam, or upon hearing a vacuum
pump sound.)

_Intrusion_ is the reexperience of the traumatic event at unwanted and
unexpected times. Symptoms of intrusion in PAS cases include: recurrent and
intrusive thoughts about the abortion or aborted child, flashbacks in which
the woman momentarily reexperiences an aspect of the abortion experience,
nightmares about the abortion or child, or anniversary reactions of intense
grief or depression on the due date of the aborted pregnancy or the
anniversary date of the abortion.

_Constriction_ is the numbing of emotional resources, or the development of
behavioral patterns, so as to avoid stimuli associated with the trauma. It is
avoidance behavior; an attempt to deny and avoid negative feelings or people,
places, or things which aggravate the negative feelings associated with the
trauma. In post-abortion trauma cases, constriction may include: an inability
to recall the abortion experience or important parts of it; efforts to avoid
activities or situations which may arouse recollections of the abortion;
withdrawal from relationships, especially estrangement from those involved in
the abortion decision; avoidance of children; efforts to avoid or deny
thoughts or feelings about the abortion; restricted range of loving or tender
feelings; a sense of a foreshortened future (e.g., does not expect a career,
marriage, or children, or a long life.); diminished interest in previously
enjoyed activities; drug or alcohol abuse; suicidal thoughts or acts; and
other self-destructive tendencies.

As previously mentioned, Barnard's study identified a 19% rate of PTSD among
women who had abortions three to five years previously. But in reality the
actual rate is probably higher. Like most post-abortion studies, Barnard's
study was handicapped by a fifty percent drop out rate. Clinical experience
has demonstrated that the women least likely to cooperate in post-abortion
research are those for whom the abortion caused the most psychological
distress. Research has confirmed this insight, demonstrating that the women
who refuse followup evaluation most closely match the demographic
characteristics of the women who suffer the most post-abortion distress. (10)
The extraordinary high rate of refusal to participate in post-abortion studies
may interpreted as evidence of constriction or avoidance behavior (not wanting
to think about the abortion) which is a major symptom of PTSD.

For many women, the onset or accurate identification of PTSD symptoms may be
delayed for several years. (11) Until a PTSD sufferer has received counseling
and achieved adequate recovery, PTSD may result in a psychological disability
which would prevent an injured abortion patient from bringing action within
the normal statutory period. This disability may, therefore, provide grounds
for an extended statutory period.

###### **INCREASED SMOKING WITH CORRESPONDENT NEGATIVE HEALTH EFFECTS**

Post-abortion stress is linked with increased cigarette smoking. Women who
abort are twice as likely to become heavy smokers and suffer the corresponding
health risks. (14) Post-abortion women are also more likely to continue
smoking during subsequent wanted pregnancies with increased risk of neonatal
death or congenital anomalies. (15)

###### **DIVORCE AND CHRONIC RELATIONSHIP PROBLEMS**

For most couples, an abortion causes unforeseen problems in their
relationship. Post-abortion couples are more likely to divorce or separate.
Many post-abortion women develop a greater difficulty forming lasting bonds
with a male partner. This may be due to abortion related reactions such as
lowered self-esteem, greater distrust of males, sexual dysfunction, substance
abuse, and increased levels of depression, anxiety, and volatile anger. Women
who have more than one abortion (representing about 45% of all abortions) are
more likely to require public assistance, in part because they are also more
likely to become single parents. (21)

###### **REPEAT ABORTIONS**

Women who have one abortion are at increased risk of having additional
abortions in the future. Women with a prior abortion experience are four times
more likely to abort a current pregnancy than those with no prior abortion
history. (22)

This increased risk is associated with the prior abortion due to lowered self
esteem, a conscious or unconscious desire for a replacement pregnancy, and
increased sexual activity post-abortion. Subsequent abortions may occur
because of conflicted desires to become pregnant and have a child and
continued pressures to abort, such as abandonment by the new male partner.
Aspects of self-punishment through repeated abortions are also reported. (23)

Approximately 45% of all abortions are now repeat abortions. The risk of
falling into a repeat abortion pattern should be discussed with a patient
considering her first abortion. Furthermore, since women who have more than
one abortion are at a significantly increased risk of suffering physical and
psychological sequelae, these heightened risks should be thoroughly discussed
with women seeking abortions.

The most complete listing of psychological problems associated with abortion
can be found at at AbortionRisks.org

* * *

**NOTES Regarding Physical Risks**

  1. **Detrimental Effects of Abortion:** An Annotated Bibliography with Commentary (Third Edition) is the most complete review of medical studies relevant to abortion. It includes brief summaries of major finding drawn from medical and psychology journal articles, books, and related materials, divided into major categories of relevant injuries. An online version of the bibliography can be found at www.AbortionRisks.com2. Kaunitz, "Causes of Maternal Mortality in the United States," Obstetrics and Gynecology, 65(5) May 1985.3. H.L. Howe, et al., "Early Abortion and Breast Cancer Risk Among Women Under Age 40," International Journal of Epidemiology 18(2):300-304 (1989); L.I. Remennick, "Induced Abortion as A Cancer Risk Factor: A Review of Epidemiological Evidence," Journal of Epidemiological Community Health, (1990); M.C. Pike, "Oral Contraceptive Use and Early Abortion as Risk Factors for Breast Cancer in Young Women," British Journal of Cancer 43:72 (1981).4. M-G, Le, et al., "Oral Contraceptive Use and Breast or Cervical Cancer: Preliminary Results of a French Case- Control Study, Hormones and Sexual Factors in Human Cancer Etiology, ed. JP Wolff, et al., Excerpta Medica: New York (1984) pp.139-147; F. Parazzini, et al., "Reproductive Factors and the Risk of Invasive and Intraepithelial Cervical Neoplasia," British Journal of Cancer, 59:805-809 (1989); H.L. Stewart, et al., "Epidemiology of Cancers of the Uterine Cervix and Corpus, Breast and Ovary in Israel and New York City," Journal of the National Cancer Institute 37(1):1-96; I. Fujimoto, et al., "Epidemiologic Study of Carcinoma in Situ of the Cervix," Journal of Reproductive Medicine 30(7):535 (July 1985); N. Weiss, "Events of Reproductive Life and the Incidence of Epithelial Ovarian Cancer," Am. J. of Epidemiology, 117(2):128-139 (1983); V. Beral, et al., "Does Pregnancy Protect Against Ovarian Cancer," The Lancet, May 20, 1978, pp. 1083-1087; C. LaVecchia, et al., "Reproductive Factors and the Risk of Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Women," International Journal of Cancer, 52:351, 1992.

  2. S. Kaali, et al., "The Frequency and Management of Uterine Perforations During First-Trimester Abortions," Am. J. Obstetrics and Gynecology 161:406-408, August 1989; M. White, "A Case-Control Study of Uterine Perforations documented at Laparoscopy," Am. J. Obstetrics and Gynecology 129:623 (1977).

  3. D. Grimes, et al., "Prevention of uterine perforation During Curettage Abortion," JAMA, 251:2108-2111 (1984); D. Grimes, et al.,"Local versus General Anesthesia: Which is Safer For Performing Suction Abortions?" Am. J. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 135:1030 (1979).

  4. K. Schulz, et al., "Measures to Prevent Cervical Injuries During Suction Curettage Abortion," The Lancet, May 28, 1983, pp 1182-1184; W. Cates, "The Risks Associated with Teenage Abortion," New England Journal of Medicine, 309(11):612-624; R. Castadot, "Pregnancy Termination: Techniques, Risks, and Complications and Their Management," Fertility and Sterility, 45(1):5-16 (1986).

  5. Barrett, et al., "Induced Abortion: A Risk Factor for Placenta Previa", American Journal of Ob&Gyn. 141:7 (1981).

  6. Hogue, Cates and Tietze, "Impact of Vacuum Aspiration Abortion on Future Childbearing: A Review", Family Planning Perspectives (May-June 1983),vol.15, no.3.. Jacobsson B, Hagberg G, Hagberg B, Ladfors L, Niklasson A, Hagberg A. Cerebral Palsy in preterm infants: a population-based case-control study of antenatal and intrapartal risk factors. Acta Paediatrica 2002;91:946-951. Calhoun BC, Shadigian E, Rooney B. Cost consequences of induced abortion as an attributable risk for preterm birth and informed consent. J Reprod Med 2007;52:929-939.

  7. Daling,et.al., "Ectopic Pregnancy in Relation to Previous Induced Abortion", JAMA, 253(7):1005-1008 (Feb. 15, 1985); Levin, et.al., "Ectopic Pregnancy and Prior Induced Abortion", American Journal of Public Health (1982), vol.72,p253; C.S. Chung, "Induced Abortion and Ectopic Pregnancy in Subsequent Pregnancies," American Journal of Epidemiology 115(6):879-887 (1982)

  8. T. Radberg, et al., "Chlamydia Trachomatis in Relation to Infections Following First Trimester Abortions," Acta Obstricia Gynoecological (Supp. 93), 54:478 (1980); L. Westergaard, "Significance of Cervical Chlamydia Trachomatis Infection in Post-abortal Pelvic Inflammatory Disease," Obstetrics and Gynecology, 60(3):322-325, (1982); M. Chacko, et al., "Chlamydia Trachomatosis Infection in Sexually Active Adolescents: Prevalence and Risk Factors," Pediatrics, 73(6), (1984); M. Barbacci, et al., "Post- Abortal Endometritis and Isolation of Chlamydia Trachomatis," Obstetrics and Gynecology 68(5):668-690, (1986); S. Duthrie, et al., "Morbidity After Termination of Pregnancy in First-Trimester," Genitourinary Medicine 63(3):182-187, (1987).

  9. Burkman, et al., "Morbidity Risk Among Young Adolescents Undergoing Elective Abortion" Contraception, 30:99-105 (1984); "Post-Abortal Endometritis and Isolation of Chlamydia Trachomatis," Obstetrics and Gynecology 68(5):668- 690, (1986)

  10. Frank, et.al., "Induced Abortion Operations and Their Early Sequelae", Journal of the Royal College of General Practitioners (April 1985),35(73):175-180; Grimes DA, Cates W Jr. Abortion: Methods and complications. In: Hafez ESE, ed. Human reproduction: Conception and contraception (2nd ed). Hagerstown, Maryland: Harper and Row, 1980:796‑813.; M.A. Freedman, "Comparison of complication rates in first trimester abortions performed by physician assistants and physicians," Am. J. Public Health, 76(5):550- 554 (1986).

  11. Wadhera, "Legal Abortion Among Teens, 1974-1978", Canadian Medical Association Journal, 122:1386-1389,(June 1980).

  12. Ney, et.al., "The Effects of Pregnancy Loss on Women's Health," Soc. Sci. Med. 48(9):1193-1200, 1994; Badgley, Caron, & Powell, _Report of the Committee on the Operation of the Abortion Law,_ Supply and Services, Ottawa, 1977: 319-321.

  13. Gissler, M., et. al., "Pregnancy-associated deaths in Finland 1987-1994 -- definition problems and benefits of record linkage," _Acta Obsetricia et Gynecolgica Scandinavica_ 76:651-657 (1997).

  14. Zhou, Weijin, et. al., "Induced Abortion and Subsequent Pregnancy Duration," Obstetrics & Gynecology 94(6):948-953 (Dec. 1999). Klemetti R, Gissler M, Niinimäki M, Hemminki E. Birth outcomes after induced abortion: a nationwide register-based study of first births in Finland. _Hum Reprod_ 2012 Aug 29. [Epub ahead of print]. Rooney B, Calhoun BC. Induced Abortion and Risk of Later Premature Births. Journal American Physicians  & Surgeons 2003;8(2):46-49 Bhattacharya S, Lowit A, Bhattacharya S, Raja EA. -et al. Reproductive outcomes following induced abortion: a national register-based study in Scotland. BMJ OPEN Summer 2012. Swingle HM, Colaizy TT, Zimmerman MB, et al Abortion and the risk of subsequent preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Reproductive Med 2009;54:95-108.

  15. D. Berkeley, P.L. Humphreys, and D. Davidson, "Demands Made on General Practice by Women Before and After an Abortion," J. R. Coll. Gen. Pract. 34:310-315, 1984.

  16. Frank, et.al., “Induced Abortion Operations and Their Early Sequelae”, Journal of the Royal College of General Practitioners (April 1985), vol.35,no.73,pp175-180. and Grimes and Cates, “Abortion: Methods and Complications”, Human Reproduction, 2nd ed., 796-813.

**NOTES RELATIVE TO SECTION ON PSYCHOLOGICAL RISKS:**

  1. An excellent resource is Thomas Strahan’s **Detrimental Effects of Abortion:** An Annotated Bibliography with Commentary (Third Edition) This resource includes brief summaries of major finding drawn from medical and psychology journal articles, books, and related materials, divided into major categories of relevant injuries. An online version can be found at AbortionRisks.org

  2. Ashton,"They Psychosocial Outcome of Induced Abortion", British Journal of Ob&Gyn., 87:1115-1122, (1980).

  3. Badgley, et.al.,Report of the Committee on the Operation of the Abortion Law (Ottawa:Supply and Services, 1977)pp.313-321.

  4. R. Somers, "Risk of Admission to Psychiatric Institutions Among Danish Women who Experienced Induced Abortion: An Analysis on National Record Linkage," Dissertation Abstracts International, Public Health 2621-B, Order No. 7926066 (1979); H. David, et al., "Postpartum and Postabortion Psychotic Reactions," Family Planning Perspectives 13:88-91 (1981).

  5. Kent, et al., "Bereavement in Post-Abortive Women: A Clinical Report", World Journal of Psychosynthesis (Autumn-Winter 1981), vol.13,nos.3-4.

  6. Catherine Barnard, The Long-Term Psychological Effects of Abortion, Portsmouth, N.H.: Institute for Pregnancy Loss, 1990).

  7. Herman, Trauma and Recovery, (New York: Basic Books, 1992) 34.

  8. Francke, The Ambivalence of Abortion (New York: Random House, 1978) 84-95.

  9. Zakus, "Adolescent Abortion Option," Social Work in Health Care, 12(4):87 (1987); Makhorn, "Sexual Assault & Pregnancy," New Perspectives on Human Abortion, Mall & Watts, eds., (Washington, D.C.: University Publications of America, 1981).

  10. Adler, "Sample Attrition in Studies of Psycho-social Sequelae of Abortion: How great a problem." Journal of Social Issues, 1979, 35, 100-110.

  11. Speckhard, "Postabortion Syndrome: An Emerging Public Health Concern," Journal of Social Issues, 48(3):95-119.

  12. Speckhard, Psycho-social Stress Following Abortion, Sheed & Ward, Kansas City: MO, 1987; and Belsey, et al., "Predictive Factors in Emotional Response to Abortion: King's Termination Study - IV," Soc. Sci. & Med., 11:71-82 (1977).

  13. Speckhard, Psycho-social Stress Following Abortion, Sheed & Ward, Kansas City: MO, 1987; Gissler, Hemminki & Lonnqvist, "Suicides after pregnancy in Finland, 1987-94: register linkage study," British Journal of Medicine 313:1431-4, 1996.C. Haignere, et al., "HIV/AIDS Prevention and Multiple Risk Behaviors of Gay Male and Runaway Adolescents," Sixth International Conference on AIDS: San Francisco, June 1990; N. Campbell, et al., "Abortion in Adolescence," Adolescence, 23(92):813-823 (1988); H. Vaughan, Canonical Variates of Post-Abortion Syndrome, Portsmouth, NH: Institute for Pregnancy Loss, 1991; B. Garfinkel, "Stress, Depression and Suicide: A Study of Adolescents in Minnesota," Responding to High Risk Youth, Minnesota Extension Service, University of Minnesota (1986).

  14. Harlap, "Characteristics of Pregnant Women Reporting Previous Induced Abortions," Bulletin World Health Organization, 52:149 (1975); N. Meirik, "Outcome of First Delivery After 2nd Trimester Two Stage Induced Abortion: A Controlled Cohort Study," Acta Obsetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavia 63(1):45-50(1984); Levin, et al., "Association of Induced Abortion with Subsequent Pregnancy Loss," JAMA, 243:2495-2499, June 27, 1980.

  15. Obel, "Pregnancy Complications Following Legally Induced Abortion: An Analysis of the Population with Special Reference to Prematurity," Danish Medical Bulletin, 26:192- 199 (1979); Martin, "An Overview: Maternal Nicotine and Caffeine Consumption and Offspring Outcome," Neurobehavioral Toxicology and Tertology, 4(4):421-427, (1982).

  16. Klassen, "Sexual Experience and Drinking Among Women in a U.S. National Survey," Archives of Sexual Behavior, 15(5):363-39 ; M. Plant, Women, Drinking and Pregnancy, Tavistock Pub, London (1985); Kuzma & Kissinger, "Patterns of Alcohol and Cigarette Use in Pregnancy," Neurobehavioral Toxicology and Terotology, 3:211-221 (1981).

  17. Morrissey, et al., "Stressful Life Events and Alcohol Problems Among Women Seen at a Detoxification Center," Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 39(9):1159 (1978).

  18. Oro, et al., "Perinatal Cocaine and Methamphetamine Exposure Maternal and Neo-Natal Correlates," J. Pediatrics, 111:571- 578 (1978); D.A. Frank, et al., "Cocaine Use During Pregnancy Prevalence and Correlates," Pediatrics, 82(6):888 (1988); H. Amaro, et al., "Drug Use Among Adolescent Mothers: Profile of Risk," Pediatrics 84:144-150, (1989)

  19. Speckhard, Psycho-social Stress Following Abortion, Sheed & Ward, Kansas City: MO, 1987; J. Spaulding, et al, "Psychoses Following Therapeutic Abortion, Am. J. of Psychiatry 125(3):364 (1978); R.K. McAll, et al., "Ritual Mourning in Anorexia Nervosa," The Lancet, August 16, 1980, p. 368.

  20. Benedict, et al., "Maternal Perinatal Risk Factors and Child Abuse," Child Abuse and Neglect, 9:217-224 (1985); P.G. Ney, "Relationship between Abortion and Child Abuse," Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 24:610-620, 1979; Reardon, Aborted Women - Silent No More (Chicago: Loyola University Press, 1987), 129-30, describes a case of woman who beat her three year old son to death shortly after an abortion which triggered a "psychotic episode" of grief, guilt, and misplaced anger.

  21. Shepard, et al., "Contraceptive Practice and Repeat Induced Abortion: An Epidemiological Investigation," J. Biosocial Science, 11:289-302 (1979); M. Bracken, "First and Repeated Abortions: A Study of Decision-Making and Delay," J. Biosocial Science, 7:473-491 (1975); S. Henshaw, "The Characteristics and Prior Contraceptive Use of U.S. Abortion Patients," Family Planning Perspectives, 20(4):158-168 (1988); D. Sherman, et al., "The Abortion Experience in Private Practice," Women and Loss: Psychobiological Perspectives, ed. W.F. Finn, et al., (New York: Praeger Publ. 1985), pp98-107; E.M. Belsey, et al., "Predictive Factors in Emotional Response to Abortion: King's Termination Study - IV," Social Science and Medicine, 11:71- 82 (1977); E. Freeman, et al., "Emotional Distress Patterns Among Women Having First or Repeat Abortions," Obstetrics and Gynecology, 55(5):630-636 (1980); C. Berger, et al., "Repeat Abortion: Is it a Problem?" Family Planning Perspectives 16(2):70-75 (1984).

  22. Joyce, "The Social and Economic Correlates of Pregnancy Resolution Among Adolescents in New York by Race and Ethnicity: A Multivariate Analysis," Am. J. of Public Health, 78(6):626-631 (1988); C. Tietze, "Repeat Abortions - Why More?" Family Planning Perspectives 10(5):286-288, (1978).

  23. Leach, "The Repeat Abortion Patient," Family Planning Perspectives, 9(1):37-39 (1977); S. Fischer, "Reflection on Repeated Abortions: The meanings and motivations," Journal of Social Work Practice 2(2):70-87 (1986); B. Howe, et al., "Repeat Abortion, Blaming the Victims," _Am. J. of Public Health_ , 69(12):1242-1246, (1979).

Abortion Risks and Complications, copyright 1997, 2000 Elliot Institute.

Follow us

  * ![Facebook](https://afterabortion.org/wp-content/plugins/social-media-buttons-toolbar/inc/img/social-media-icons/facebook.png)
  * ![Twitter](https://afterabortion.org/wp-content/plugins/social-media-buttons-toolbar/inc/img/social-media-icons/twitter.png)

Posted in Articles, Mortality permalink

### Post navigation

<- Only Some Voices Count

Move to Fund Abortions for Rape Victims in the Military Abandons Women ->

* * *

### Comments

#### _Abortion Risks | Abortion Complications | Abortion Dangers | Abortion

Side Effects_ -- 135 Comments

# Comment navigation

Newer Comments ->

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e7192154386bacbd53aac035b095d726?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Ed Rivet on May 23, 2017 at 3:56 pm said:

Palesa, open your heart to the help that so many are standing by ready to give
you. Open your heart to your baby. There is no one like him or her in the
universe and never will be again. And YOU are the perfect mother chosen to
bring this one-in-the-universe child into this world.

Believe in yourself… so many others do and God our loving Father believes in
you too.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9a28563f5fd5b7f1e95b65fd19391286?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)kevin williams on May 23, 2017 at 3:55 pm said:

Dear Palesa,  
Sweetheart, adoption is one of the truest expressions of the selfless love of
a mother who wants the best for her child. There are 1.4 Million couples
waiting to adopt a baby just here in the U.S.. Most of these couples are
unable to have a baby on their own and would pay for all of your medical
expenses and more. I know a woman who experienced both abortion and adoption
who said this: "I look back at the 3 babies I no longer have, but with very
different feelings. The 2 that I aborted fill me with grief and regret, but
when I think of the one I placed for adoption I'm filled with joy because I
know he is being raised by a family that wanted him desperately, loves him and
is providing everything he needs to be all he can be."

I befriended a girl several months ago and she is choosing adoption and sees
it as what God intended all along for her. Her employer and many people God
has since put in her path is an incredible witness to that fact.

Most agencies will provide counseling for you, coverage for your medical care,
and allow you to choose a family for your child. In an open adoption you may
be able to keep in touch with your child and interact and see how their life
progresses.

I have many friends who have been waiting years to adopt. The most beautiful
and loving couples that you could possibly imagine but they have had one
miscarriage after another. They would give your baby so much love and
everything she needs to fulfill her destiny. Every child is sent into this
world by God with a unique message to deliver, a new song to sing and many
personal acts of love to bestow. If you explore the Elliot Institutes
resources on adoption you will be able to find links to many adoption
ministries and agencies where you can view literally thousands of couple's
profiles who have been approved and passed all the requirements to adopt.

I want to share a personal story with you. I was reading an article that was
talking about how many pregnancy centers, when telling women about how
adoption is a viable option women will say "What kind of a mother would I be
to put my baby up for adoption so would choose to abort instead. As I read
these words a story in the Bible just started flashing and flashing and
wouldn't stop. I had to search for it and when I did I had to read it a couple
times to really grasp the power of what it said. I was familiar with it but
always thought it was merely speaking of the wisdom of Solomon and not a
lesson about adoption. Two women had babies at the same time. One of them
rolled over in her sleep and smothered her baby. Then she switched babies and
it was up to Solomon to determine who the true mother was. "Then Solomon said
"This woman says that it is my child who is living and yours is the dead one,
but the other woman says NO! Yours is the dead one and the living child
belongs to me! So the King said "Bring me a sword!" So a sword was brought
before the King and he said "Divide the living child in two, Give half to the
one and half to the other! But the woman who's child was living's heart
yearned with compassion for her son so she spoke to the King and said "O my
Lord, Give HER the living child and BY NO MEANS harm him, but the other woman
said "Let him be neither mine or yours but divide him!" Sweetheart some loving
and incredibly strong mothers love their child so much that they would let
them go to another rather than allow any harm come to them. These two women
represent these two opposite mindsets of a woman who would place her child for
adoption and the woman who would say "What kind of a mother would I be to put
my child up for adoption" and would instead choose abortion. “Let him be
neither mine nor hers but divide him.”

I just produced a documentary where we interviewed many loving and caring
mothers who placed their children and have open adoptions where they get to
see their child grow up and participate in their life. They in effect make
another couples dream come true. It is a beautiful situation that allows a
mother to not have to live with the guilt and regret of an abortion decision.
conceivedinrape.com

Honey adoption is a win win course of action. The baby wins because its life
is preserved into a loving, providing home. The adoptive parents win because
you provided them a baby that nature wouldn't let them have on their own. You
win because you embrace your identity as a mother by choosing whats best for
your child. Time and again Ive heard parents who adopted children say that
they are certain that the child they adopted was the child God wanted them to
have all along!!! Think about how beautiful and profound that is. It means
that the biological mother embraced her divinely appointed destiny by
providing the very child that God intended the adoptive parents to have.
Perhaps from before time began! Isn't that beautiful?

God DELIGHTS to help women in crisis pregnancies! His Own Mother was in a
crisis pregnancy. He LOVES adoption too. Jesus said “I will not leave you
orphans, I will come for you.” To children who are adopted Jesus looks a whole
lot like Mom and Dad. 😉 I know a girl who was adopted along with another girl
because the adoptive parents were unable to have a baby on their own. Fifteen
years later guess what? They had their own biological child. My friend and her
sister would tease him. Mom and Dad “Had” you but they “Chose” us! 😉

Sweetheart, oftentimes God will send someone into our lives to help us, to
rescue us, to break our chains and set us free. Most often that person is a
child. I can read your hurt and pain at the thought of aborting this child.
Your pain is so palpable that I can feel it too. Please Please look deep into
your heart and ask God to help you. If you ask Him with honesty and sincerity
He will not only make it clear what you should do but He will give you
strength to do it.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1b524f4b66e0fe952dd91be2e4549467?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Cindy on May 23, 2017 at 3:54 pm said:

My heart goes out to you, Palesa, as I was in your shoes at the age of 17. I
felt pressured to have an abortion, and I was so, so, so scared of raising a
child on my own. I knew in my mind that it was my baby inside me, but another
part of me (the scared part) kept telling my head that this was a problem that
needed to go away. I never once even considered having the child and giving it
up to be adopted by a family who could give the baby a wonderful life, lots of
love, and would have the financial resources to take care of his/her needs. I
made the decision to have an abortion. I am 58 years old now, and I can,
without a doubt, tell you that that once decision sent me into a downward
spiral for the past 40 years….my entire adult life. I started drinking, using
drugs, partying, having sex with whomever and whenever I wanted to, and I just
kept getting more and more depressed. I never even realized that all this
behavior was due to the abortion and how it so deeply affected my soul. In
fact, I never made the connection until just a few years ago. Thanks to Jesus,
I am forgiven for that sin! But it has taken me many more years to forgive
myself and stop thinking of myself as a worthless human being. I guess I'm
telling you all this because I want you to think very hard about the decision
to abort your own child. Yes….the problem will go away….physically. However,
there are always consequences for every decision we make in our lives. Try to
think beyond how this is affecting you today, and, instead, think about how
the consequences of whatever decision you make today will affect you for the
remainder of your life. I am praying for you, sweet girl!

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/81eba2ca85afe13c144b180f0c94c6cf?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Sheryl Hoyle on May 23, 2017 at 3:46 pm said:

Palesa, I have been in your shoes…and chose abortion. Worst mistake ever.
Years of bondage..there is help out there for you.. Praying that God will
protect you and your baby.  
Been in your shoes.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a80905ca7f2e5858b15a0f582bac6d03?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Mark and Kate on May 23, 2017 at 3:46 pm said:

Dear Palesa,  
My wife and I are praying for you. God is bigger than all this. Stay strong.
We are with you.  
Love,  
Mark and Kate

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d94a501abb3014b301fdcb76b5d907d6?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Sharon on May 23, 2017 at 3:43 pm said:

Palesa, I am praying for you. You are brave for reaching out for help. May God
richly bless you and your baby.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fa34c3b36b3af99c4a6b10df3e1f2b58?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Sr C on May 23, 2017 at 3:36 pm said:

Palesa, I am praying for you and so are many other people! There are many
people and groups who can help you, your child, and your family. Have you
checked OptionLine? https://optionline.org/

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b878b8011cada24f3b9e4abc1fbd5216?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Mary Kuh on May 23, 2017 at 3:31 pm said:

How brave and strong of you to reach out to someone during this time! You
should try to google a pregnancy resource center near you -- they'll offer
some good resources and help on all your options. Wishing you the very best,
brave Palesa!

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/871e36042e9423b53abb901078725745?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)S Delia on May 23, 2017 at 3:28 pm said:

Your child will be your consolation. You will fall in love and your life will
be blessed!!!! Seek help through a pregnancy counseling center. if you really
don't feel as though you can nurture this child then there are so many people
who want to adopt babies. Give your child a chance at a better life. Just
don't kill the baby. The child does not deserve this.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1e6b529c0ac9a09ad7b511be55dddd38?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Palesa on May 22, 2017 at 2:26 pm said:

Hi, I'm still a learner and 17 Years old I'm pregnant and i don't know what to
do my boyfriend has a 5 month old baby already and my mom doesn't like him and
i feel having an abortions is the only answer but I'm afraid of it's effects.
Please i really need help because I'm really scared and underage but worst of
all I'm not sure if I'm ready to be a mother yet.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on May 22, 2017 at 6:45 pm said:
    

Dear Palesa,

I understand how overwhelmed you feel. You are right to be concerned about
both the physical and emotional effects of abortion. Please read about the
risk factors that identify women at greatest risk, as it is likely that you
fit into one or more of these higher risk categories. That's also a good page
for your mother and boyfriend to read if they think abortion is a good idea.

Palesa, don't do it. It's not worth it. And in the long run, you'll be much
happier with the child you love than you will ever be trying to cope with the
fact that you had an abortion.

Regarding your fear about not being ready to be a mother yet. Here's a secret.
No one is ever ready. We learn to be good parents only through on-the-job
training. You'll do fine. I'm not saying it will be easy. It will take work
and sacrifice, but you will grow and value it all and become a better person
because of every sleepless night and sacrifice.

Read some of the testimonies of women who have been were you are and wish they
had been wise enough to turn away from abortion.

You can do this! Don't give up hope. This will change your life, of course.
But in good ways. An abortion will change your life, too, but it will drag on
you and bring you sorrow. It looks like the easy way out. But it's not. Once
you became pregnant, your life was already permanently changed. Ready or not,
you are a mother now. The only question is whether you will be the mother who
can treasure your's child's laughter or a mother who will cry because you
never had the chance to hear that laugh, or hold that little hand.

Be not afraid. God will bless you through this child. There may be a time of
testing, and a time when you need to be strong and hold onto the hope and
faith that everything will turn out. But you can do it!

You're in my prayers. Please keep in touch and let us know how you are doing.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/14671082c8ada628363e9a2d90f162b2?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Terrell on May 23, 2017 at 3:59 pm said:
    

There are people who will help you Palesa. And I'm praying for you. Give this
whole thing to God and ask him to direct you. He will be faithful and will
always help you do what is good and right.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d9dc0e8041ef573c5294354b607b9011?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Lisa DeSherlia on May 23, 2017 at 4:20 pm said:
    

Dear Palesa:

I'm Lisa and I just learned about your difficult situation. I know that you
feel terrified, alone, helpless, and overwhelmed at this time. You are right
to be taking this seriously. You are faced with an awesome responsibility, no
matter what you choose.Please know that no matter how you feel now that are
are not alone. You can reach out for help and I hope and pray that you will do
just that. Your boyfriend can also get help. I am listing resources below.
Please consider a few!

If you need a place to stay, text SHELTER to 313131.

If you are being abused, call 1-800-799-SAFE (7233).

You can text PREGNANT to 313131.

You can text "Helpline" to 313131.

You can call 1-800-712-HELP (4357). Counselors help match you with a pregnancy
help center in your area. THey can help your boyfriend also.

If you are despondent you can call: 1-800-273-8255.

If you don't want your parents (or anyone) to know about your baby, you can
surrender this helpline without fear of prosecution. Call: 1-866-99BABY1
(1-866-992-2291).

You can contact Birthright. They exist to help girls: 1-800-550-4900.

You can visit: http://optionline.org

You can visit: http://www.standupgirl.com

You can visit: https://www.care-net.org/find-a-pregnancy-center

Prayers 4 You N 4 all Involved!

Lisa

Reply ↓

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9b55e30d1cdf344e3f93b02cdd482710?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)MARY on May 24, 2017 at 2:59 am said:
    

I WAS RAPED AND MY MOTHER DID NOT WANT ME TOO HAVE THE BABY. NO ONE TOLD BUT I
KNEW IT WAS WRONG. SHE IS GOOD NOW. IF YOU NEED TO TALK SEND ME AN EMAIL

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/89f0cf9111b9268431a61d4ed9ab7a09?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Mary on May 23, 2017 at 10:40 pm said:
    

Please hang on, Palesa, you feel deep down not to do this, you love your baby
and your family will too.  
We are all praying for you and for the life of your child. I pray for strength
for you to do this.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/44ce130f88b2b3bdd0e1d6caa93e2e8f?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)kalanzi collin on May 8, 2017 at 4:26 am said:

My girlfriend had an abortion 5 days back but she is weak and lost her
apeptite so plz help me to overcome this.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on May 12, 2017 at 11:03 pm said:
    

Hello, I'm so glad you found our site. I'll try to give you some help, but
please note that I can't give you medical advice. If your girlfriend is having
physical problems (especially anything beyond what the clinic told you to
expect, or if she is having symptoms this long after the abortion) then she
should see a doctor to make sure she is okay. If there is anything that seems
to be very serious or life-threatening, get her to a doctor or emergency room
right away. I really can't tell you what symptoms are normal or not, so you
should seek help for her or persuade her to seek it if you are feeling
concerned.

Emotionally, she has just been through a huge ordeal and may not be able to
process the situation yet. She likely needs support and care from you, and you
need to remember that you too might be feeling the fallout from this and need
support as well. Obviously, I don't know the circumstances that led to the
abortion, or how either of you are feeling about it. Even if you felt okay
with the decision at the time, sometimes troubling emotions and regret don't
hit until afterward. You can talk to your girlfriend about it when she seems
ready, but I wouldn't force the situation if she doesn't want to discuss it.

What I would suggest also suggest is that you contact a group that offers
support for those who have been through an abortion (note that these groups
are for women and men, so they can help you too if you need that). These
groups offer free, confidential and non-judgemental counseling and support, or
just a listening ear if you need it. In any case, they may be able to help you
address your concerns about your girlfriend and figure out how best to help
her.

You can find a list of such organizations on our healing page. If you don’t
feel ready to talk with someone over the phone, you can contact Rachel’s
Vineyard by email or get help through text (text “HELPLINE” to 313131) or chat
from OptionLine. Rachel’s Vineyard also has a Q&A section where you can post
and read questions about healing.

Reply ↓

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/355a106d92cf04af57cf600fcf015c23?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Joan Olson on May 24, 2017 at 3:43 am said:
    

Palesa, I have a lovely 11 year old adopted granddaughter. Her 17 yr. old
birth mother came from almost the exact circumstances as you. We are so
grateful that she was so brave to give life to her child. It was a private
adoption. She chose our daughter and husband from three applicants. It was an
emotional moment when she laid the baby in the arms of her new parents, but
she knows she will see and get to know her daughter again one day. She will
never have to live with the pain and regrets of ending the life of her own
child, and she knows that that little girl has the love and guidance of two
mature parents. I pray that you will make the same decision of bringing your
baby into the world as a blessing to a specal couple who are able to be the
parents that you are not able to be at this time….and that one day you will be
able to marry and be the mother God created you to be. Our granddaughter knows
she's adopted and looks forward to the day when she will be able to meet "the
mom who God chose" to bring her into the world to be loved and raised in our
family.  
I pray that you also will give yourself the gift of assurance that one day,
you and you child will meet again. There's nothing more wonderful to look
forward to on this earth.  
You are in my prayers. Don't be afraid, God has His arms around you.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8aa61dd16f543f3978503273daa1e9f4?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)De Lastan on April 4, 2017 at 3:12 pm said:

Hi,thanks for the good information to people about abortion.my question is, my
first cuz had an abortion last week ,only me I leant about it though she don't
khow I khow .my concerned is she is only 20yrs, am fearing for her future life
and chances of her doing it again since they still together with the
boyfriend.  
Should I alert one of family doctor to try to discuss and find out if there is
any kind of help she need to given

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on April 4, 2017 at 6:34 pm said:
    

I wouldn't recommend sharing her secret with others. But I would look for
opportunities to let her know that if she ever needs to talk about it or is
struggling with it, you're there to listen and try to help. And if she does
ever reach out, encourage her to seek help from a
[https://afterabortion.org/help-healing/ post-abortion healing program]. Don't
push her. Don't make her feel like you are judging her or expecting her to
feel guilt. Just be there for her if and when she does want a sympathetic ear.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4bc580650be0d2c0febac23783e57773?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)ewuraama Patience on February 18, 2017 at 1:08 pm said:

In have had abortion five years ago and I don't know whether some of the
foetus left inside. Ever since I did the abortion have being reducing weight.
What should I do. And my period is not flowing properly

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on February 18, 2017 at 3:41 pm said:
    

Please go see a doctor. You are in my prayers.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5ce4eb7fa65962198aec15c44e150ba1?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Sabastine on February 5, 2017 at 12:11 am said:

Thank you and God bless you for the healings and helps you are bringing to the
victims of abortion risks. I now want to address my fellow youths, please
avoid abortion and every thing that will lead you into it. Though your doctor
may tell you that there will be no problem committing abortion, but the truth
is that it is not safe at all. If there be no complications now, it will still
come later. Not to talk of the guilts of blood shed if you have conscience at
all. Please avoid pre marital sex and be safe from all the possible abortion
risks. God bless you.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/704a3d84b6b8bcb915f8e6d08cae24ef?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Q-boy on January 9, 2017 at 3:28 pm said:

What measures could take when I found that I can't get a baby due to abortion?

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on January 9, 2017 at 4:03 pm said:
    

Has a doctor told you that complications from a previous abortion prevent you
from being able to become pregnant again?

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/d47f85ed51a95ead81de6761d26965d9?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Devi on December 9, 2016 at 9:38 am said:

Hello sir,  
Already I had 2 abortions in the same year.now I am pregnant after did my
second abortion two months back. I am having financial and also carrier vise
settling process. So now I want to do abort.is it safe to me to do.is there
any health issues in it… I need your advise.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on December 9, 2016 at 3:50 pm said:
    

Risks increase with each abortion. Multiple abortions are linked to higher
rates of death, reproductive problems, depression, anxiety, addictions, post-
partum depression, and more problems parenting children. Also, you may be
trapped in a cycle of repeat abortions. The only way out is to carry a
pregnancy to term. I would strongly advise against another abortion. Please
look for help with any expenses for carrying the baby to term, whether you
decide to keep her or place her for adoption, from a pregnancy help center or
church. Where do you live? Perhaps we can help find you some local support.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/277eec689526bd254304e5098b1456d5?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Benson Beauty on November 7, 2016 at 12:24 pm said:

Am pregnant I don't know what to do cause my boyfriend dad is very strict the
goes to my dad we don't know what to do we are considering abortion

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on November 7, 2016 at 5:30 pm said:
    

First thing: please read about the risk factors that studies have shown can
identify which women will have the most emotional problems after an abortion.

If any of these risk factors apply to you, I strongly discourage you from
having an abortion just to please your parents. Trust me. Parents aren't happy
with surprise pregnancies. But they get over it. Especially when they see that
beautiful child. They will adjust. Probably, faster than you think. A lot of
the "gruff" of parents is to convey their hope that you won't have children
"until you're ready." But once you're pregnant . . . well, they can't argue
with the fact that having a child is the only thing that ever truly makes us
"ready" because now we really do have to be responsible for another person.

You can do this! I'm sure you will be a great mother . . . precisely because,
as all mothers have learned, there is lots of on the job training.

Don't let yourself feel pressured into an abortion to please others. It's the
surest sign of regrets and remorse that can last a life time.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/89de9ab7b27edadef2eece8a9d829fa4?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Nikki on September 30, 2016 at 3:33 am said:

Hi I need help I am 8 weeks pregnant I am to have an abortion tomorrow morning
this will be my 6th abortion in period of 9 years my last was a couple of
years ago. I'm not proud of myself I'm act very ashamed of who I am and what
I've done. I have 3 kids already and I barely make it with them it's just over
whelming the thought of bringing another baby into the world I should have
been more careful. I'm scared I'm scared of dying I'm scared of what impact
this is having on my body emotionally I'm numb to everything. But physically
my health is poor. I just don't know what to do

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on September 30, 2016 at 3:29 pm said:
    

Dear Nikki,

Please reach out to one of the post-abortion healing programs listed on our
help page. Or more than one. Keep calling and interviewing until you find the
right one for you.

Repeat abortions are especially harmful, both physically and emotionally. They
may also indicate a pattern of self-punishing behavior that you need to sort
through in counseling.

I would, of course, also encourage you to cancel your appointment today and
meet with women at the local pro-life pregnancy help center. Maybe they can
give you the immediate help and resources you need to break the cycle this
time. I know it is hard to imagine handling a fourth child, but give them a
chance to help you find a way.

You are in my prayers.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/0b1a8d0b66ad396fa9e195e90a96ce3e?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)deedy on July 11, 2016 at 5:35 pm said:

I had an abortion last year for my boyfriend because I was scared by then he
still had issues with the mother of his child….now everything is sorted out
and I hav introduced him to my family and last week we just both found out
that am pregnant now am scared of mum and dad and my bro who is paying my
tuition fees and we have considered another abortion with him coz hz nt
working at the moment and we re worried my bro myt stop paying for my school
tho we re both having second thots about it….pliz help

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on July 11, 2016 at 9:44 pm said:
    

Hello Deedy,

I'm sure you are very scared right now. But please don't feel like you need to
rush into anything! First, having a baby doesn't have to be the end of the
world -- it can truly be a joy! Yes, even in circumstances where you are not
prepared and don't know how to handle it, or how your family will react.

The first thing you should do is reach out to someone who can help. I don't
know your family situation and it sounds like you are scared about letting
them know. However, there are many organizations out there that support women
and couples during and after pregnancy. They can help you and your boyfriend
sort out your plans. This page has a list of organizations nationwide who
offer options counseling, practical support, relationship help and more to
women who are pregnant. If you are outside the U.S., contact us at
elliotinstitute@gmail.com and I will try to find a local organization that can
help you.

Also, you shouldn't have to quit school because of a baby! It can be a hard
path but women can and do succeed at this. If you are in college or university
the Pregnant on Campus Initiative and Feminists for Life's College Outreach
Program may be able to help with resources, information and support to help
you complete your education. FFL also has a web site called Raising Kids on a
Shoestring that has a ton of information on free and frugal resources,
solutions and practical support for pregnant women, expectant fathers and
parents.

I'm guessing that since you are having second thoughts that your first
experience with abortion wasn't all that great. Not only do you not have to go
down that road again, but if either you or your boyfriend is struggling there
is hope and healing available. Many of the pregnancy help organizations listed
on our help page also offer post-abortion support and counseling for women,
men and couples. They can help you and your boyfriend heal from this
experience and work out any issues this may have caused in your relationship.
There are also organizations dedicated to helping after abortion such as
Rachel's Vineyard, which also offers support through email.

You and your boyfriend need to listen to your hearts, find people who can
support and get real information about your options -- and you do have options
even though it might feel like you don't. Don't let yourself be pushed into
making a hasty decision you might regret.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fe07725199a2d6226e2d93146cdbf71a?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Christine mutisya on June 18, 2016 at 6:10 am said:

Hi, am Xtine.. Am 5wks pregnant and my guy has denied being responsible for
it, he has suggested I do abortion and if I will keep it it's upon me,, not to
bother him.. Since last week he hasn't called me and if I try reaching him my
call can't go through?? I need your advice pls

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on June 20, 2016 at 3:09 pm said:
    

Hello Christine,

Don't feel like you have to have an abortion just because your boyfriend wants
to get one. You have rights and options. It is actually illegal for him to try
to force you to abort or not to support his child. You need to talk with
someone who can help you find out all your options and make the decision that
is best for you and your baby.

This article "What to do if your boyfriend wants you to get an abortion," has
a lot of great advice and suggestions as to how to handle this situation. You
should also contact a pregnancy help center as well. This page has a list of
organizations nationwide who offer options counseling, practical support,
relationship help and more to women who are pregnant. If you are outside the
U.S., contact us at elliotinstitute@gmail.com and I will try to find a local
organization that can help you.

Please know that you are strong enough to get through this. Don't feel like
you have to give in or that you can only take the path your boyfriend wants
you to take. Things may seem frightening right now, but you are not alone.
There are people who want to help and support you and who care about you and
your baby.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on June 20, 2016 at 4:30 pm said:
    

Having an abortion to satisfy the demands of a boyfriend just puts you at
higher risk of greater emotional problems later. If he refuses to be part of
your child's life, that will be his loss. The law will require him to pay
child support, but it can't require him to be a good dad. And if that is the
way he is, you are better off without him. You can and will find a loving
husband who will be a good father for your children. Meanwhile, just
concentrate on being the best mother you can for your child…including
protecting your child from his father's short-sightedness. Perhaps, as the
pregnancy progress or after the child is born, it will soften his heart and he
will love his child as he should. But for right now, he is lost in his own
selfishness. Don't let his current blindness push you into something you know
is wrong. You will never regret having your child, nor will all the other
people who will come to love your child…grandparents, friends, future spouse .
. . and eventually, the child's father. You are making the right choice.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/71a9e14f04069fc8d6920826e58f5d76?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)mykia on June 10, 2016 at 12:43 pm said:

i think that people should not get abortions because they re killing their
babies and that is a bad thing.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on June 10, 2016 at 3:53 pm said:
    

Hi Mykia,

Thanks for your comment. It is always a good idea to have information
available to help those who need it. Many women are pressured or coerced to
abort, or don't know about other options available. Our pregnancy help page
includes a list of organizations that provide help to women and their loved
ones who are pregnant and need support.

There are also organizations that provide support and counseling to women, men
and families after abortion. You can learn more about this on our post-
abortion healing page.

It's a good idea to hang on to this information to pass on to anyone you know
who might need it.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/766175863d1f55f1f024b3b62a2cd4fc?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)kyry on May 31, 2016 at 12:00 am said:

hello. i've a friend who has undergone one abortion before for almost four
years. she was really terrified and until now, she's still afraid..mostly,
she's afraid if she can't bear any child anymore. because her husband and her
were planning to have a child, they've tried it for several times,but still
she's not conceiving. She told me that she haven't gone to any doctor since
the abortion and she's afraid that complications were present in her uterus.
and she can observe a foul-smelling discharges inside her.I REALLY NEEDED your
help urgently for me to advise my close friend.please

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on June 10, 2016 at 3:47 pm said:
    

Dear Kyry,

Your friend should see a doctor if she is having any kind of problems. If she
is having complications and they are not treated, it could create more
problems later on. She should also definitely let the doctor know about her
abortion history so that the doctor can address any issues this might have
caused. I would really encourage her to do this even if she is afraid, so that
any problems she may be having can be treated. It could also be that there is
nothing wrong or it is simply just taking her a while to conceive, but seeing
a doctor could help put her fears to rest.

If you would like to find out more information for her or find a pro-life
doctor (in the US) that can help, you might consider contacting the American
Association of Pro-Life Ob/Gyns. They won't be able to diagnose any problems
from a distance, but they might be able to give you and your friend some
information to put her at ease.

Also, if your friend is struggling after abortion (either with fears about not
being able to have a child, feelings of grief or shame, etc.) she should know
that she is not alone. There are ministries out there that can help. They
offer free and confidential support and counseling to help her work through
any fears or negative emotions she might be having after abortion. These
counselors are kind and non-judgemental -- sometimes they are other women who
have had abortions so they know exactly what it is like. You can find out more
about this on our healing page. If you live outside the U.S., you can contact
Rachel's Vineyard for more information by email. They have healing
organizations in a number of countries and also offer support through email.

I hope this helps! It sounds like you are a very good friend who really cares
and wants to help your friend, so I would strongly encourage you to share this
information with her and reach out to people who can help her.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/dd1369429682a983b95b8d2468e875cd?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Abhija on May 29, 2016 at 11:31 am said:

I feel in love with a wrong person and became pregnant 3 years ago. He wasn't
supportive, and also due to my families situation, I had to undergo abortion
without any option, I am unable to reveal this to anyone around, as it would
create a huge issue in my family. Now am 23 my parents had found the right guy
for me and am happily got married 1 year before. Now we are plan to have a
baby. So before that we went hospital to know my health condition. And
gynecologist prefer to anxioum to conceive scan.My worry is that, will my
abortion affect my future? Can doctor identify that i have undergone abortion
in my past ? Am completely worried about it. Can someone help me on this ?
Also, my husband don't know about my past. Kindly help me with my question.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on June 10, 2016 at 3:37 pm said:
    

Dear Abhija,

First of all, please know how that I'm very sorry you believed you had no
other option and that you had to have an abortion. I'm sure this is a sad and
difficult situation for you. If you are struggling, please don't try to keep
this all to yourself. Is there someone you can trust to talk with about it,
such as a minister or pastor, without telling your family? I don't know where
you live, but there may be a pregnancy center, pro-life organization, or other
ministry in your area that offers support to women who have been hurt by
abortion. You can also email Rachel's Vineyard for support by email. I would
really encourage you to contact them as they give you counseling and support.

As for your question, your doctor probably can't tell if you have had an
abortion unless you tell him. That being said, it is usually a good idea to
tell your doctor as it might help him or her to know about any issues that can
affect your health or fertility. In the U.S. at least doctors are not supposed
to share that information with anyone.

I don't know you or your husband, so I don't want to give you advice as to
what you should tell him. Keeping something as important as this a secret
because of feelings of shame or fear is usually not good for a marriage.
However, only you know how this could affect your relationship with him. This
is why I would really encourage you to contact Rachel's Vineyard or another
trusted counselor. You can tell them about your situation and they can help
guide you about what you should do. Please know that you are not alone, that
there are people who care and want to help.

You can find out more about post-abortion counseling here, including a list of
organizations in the US. If you live outside the US, you can email me at
elliotinstitute@gmail.com and I will try to help you find an organization in
your area that can help.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/afbf62319b001911bfb1259dce3a78ab?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)debrah on May 26, 2016 at 1:33 pm said:

hi  
my friend had an abortion some 3months ago and she got pregnant again. she
wants to have another termination. she is 19years what can i tell her

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on May 26, 2016 at 4:43 pm said:
    

Hi Debrah,

Thank you for trying to help you friend. Do you know the reasons why she is
seeking another abortion? Knowing that and helping her address those issues
can help. It sometimes happens that a woman might get pregnant soon after her
abortion because she wants another baby to "make up" for the one she lost, but
she ends up aborting again because the problems that led her to have the
abortion in the first place are still there.

Your friend needs you to be there for her, to talk to her, listen to her and
know that you want to help. Encourage her to discuss why she wants or feels
like she needs to have an abortion and see if you can work together to find
solutions so she doesn't feel like this is her only option. Remember that
right now she is probably not in the best position to making big decisions, as
she is likely feeling scared and overwhelmed.

Encourage her to take time to explore all her options and find resources and
support to help. You can contact OptionLine or visit this page for a list of
organizations that help women who are pregnant -- all the help they give is
free and confidential. If you can, offer to go with her or help her contact
them so she doesn't have to do it alone.

Also, if you friend is being pressured to have an abortion she doesn't want,
this article has lots of helpful information for women in that situation. She
can also contact the Center Against Forced Abortions for legal help to stop
others from pushing her to have an abortion.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/12d1f4faf8a37e7d65471d2219258fea?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Absnns on May 18, 2016 at 2:10 am said:

I am newly married after 10 days my wife get pregnant both wanted abortion
because we are not ready yet what should I do please suggest there any risk in
abortion please tell me

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on May 18, 2016 at 8:23 pm said:
    

Hello, Absnns, thank you for coming to this site! It's normal to not feel like
you are ready to have a baby and to be worried about what this means for your
future. It's okay to feel that way. But what you shouldn't do is let those
worries and any difficulties you are having right now drive you to make a
decision you might regret. Abortion is a decision you can't undo, and it's
hard to make good decisions when you are facing a crisis.

Abortion does carry risks to your wife's physical and mental health, as you
can see from this page. There are also risks to your relationship as well.
Many couples have problems in their marriages or break up after abortion. It
can cause resentment, difficulty communicating, grief, regret, pain and other
problems that can make your relationship fall apart. You may not feel ready to
have this baby, but do you really want to risk putting your wife through
something that could hurt her (and you) and lead to problems in your
relationship?

I would suggest visiting this page to learn about the problems people might
have in their relationships after abortion, and also reading through the
comments (especially the comments posted to Samantha) to hear from others
about their stories of how their abortions affected them -- and also to read
about how their lives turned out when they had the baby. You might find some
good information and encouragement here. Also, the Silent No More Awareness
Campaign also has lots of stories from those who had abortions that talk about
the impact abortion had on them on their relationships.

Above all, please seek out support from an organization that can help you. I
don't know where you are located, but there may be a crisis pregnancy center
or other organization in your area that offers free and confidential support
for women and their families during and after pregnancy. They can help you get
information about your options, resolve issue that make you feel like you
aren't ready to have the baby, and find resources that are available to help
you. Visit the pregnancy help page for more information and a list of
organization that offer this kind of support. If you are outside the U.S., you
can email me at elliotinsitute@gmail.com and I will try to put you in touch
with someone that can help you.

What about seeking help and support from your families, friends or a church?
You may find that there are more people than you think that will be happy
about your pregnancy and willing to help you.

Please don't rush into making this decision. You need time, information, and
the right support. Your wife needs you to be there for her and your child.
Please seek out help and support from people who care.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/25e928f05a02b37a5a5dcf1eaa1f1cff?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Maria on April 10, 2016 at 12:23 pm said:

Hi,  
My friend had 3 abortions.2 abortions in a year and the 3rd one after a year.
she was forced to do it but she didn't want to. All the 3 babies she had was
not more than 1 month old.  
I have just read the article in yr website n it said that the risk of death is
very high,does it include death in pregnancy or natural?she is afraid of it.
she is planning to get married in few months? Can she ever get pregnant again?
What are the steps she needs to take concerning this?

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on April 11, 2016 at 5:06 pm said:
    

Hello Maria, please encourage your friend to speak with her doctor and tell
him or her about the abortion if she has concerns about her health or
fertility. They will be best equipped to advise her and treat any health
issues she may have. If you are in the U.S., a good resource would be to
contact the American Association of Pro-Life Ob/Gyns to find a doctor who can
help her.

Yes, research has found increased rates of health problems for women who have
had abortions but it doesn't mean your friend has them. Our intent is not to
make people afraid but to provide information on what the research is finding.
Your friend needs to talk to someone who can help her put her fears to rest.

Also, if the abortion was unwanted, she might be struggling emotionally as
well. She is not alone and there are groups that can offer emotional support
and a safe place to talk. You should encourage who to contact someone who can
listen and provide counseling and support to help her heal. You can find more
information on this on our post-abortion healing page (or email us at
elliotinstitute@gmail.com if you are outside the U.S.).

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/388456b7cd34d49d1be8f842d9f5001b?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)nirmal on April 7, 2016 at 12:36 pm said:

hello  
I'm 26 years lady. I already did 3 abortions and again I have pregnancy. I
used some vaccinations against rubella and doctor told me till three months
you should have pregnancy, it only have 2 month of vaccinations. I'm so worry
about that what I do? hoping your good suggestion. exactly I do not want to
abort it but scared about hamperness of vaccines.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on April 7, 2016 at 3:36 pm said:
    

There is very little risk that the vaccine will cause any harm to your baby.
Doctors recommend to avoid pregnancy for even a small risk. According to one
authority, the risk is all theoretical; there is no evidence that the vaccine
has ever caused rubella related complications in babies . . . even when women
are vaccinated during the first few weeks of pregnancy!

The doctor's advice was just that . . . a recommendation on the level of "why
take any chance when you can just avoid pregnancy." Now that you are pregnant,
stop worrying. Trust God. Trust your own body.

On a side note, I'd also encourage you to find help with any emotional hurts
you may have over your past abortions. Talking to a supportive counselor,
pastor, or friend may help you overcome issues that may make it harder to be
the best mom to your children that you can be.

You are in our prayers. Please don't hesitate to write again if you need more
advice or encouragement. We'd also love to hear about your progress! Be not
afraid!

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8f77a5bdb51fab2e9c29c56ba9542f81?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Koki on April 5, 2016 at 10:04 am said:

My girlfriend did abortion because i have three kids, she is unemployed and i
dont have a house last year.  
Today we have moved away from it, we never discuss is and that was our
agreement then.

She did murder for her convinience and i am totally broken even though she is
not the first girl who aborted my child, the problem with her doing it is - "i
love her" but ever since she did it i'm no longer sure whether we love each
other or we are just sex partners who play dangerous sex games by not
condomizing.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on April 5, 2016 at 4:24 pm said:
    

Hi Koki, it sounds like you and your girlfriend need help to work through
this. What a painful and devastating loss -- I am so sorry for what you have
been through. Not discussing it or seeking healing will only do further damage
to your relationship -- you need to talk, to get things out in the open and
make good decisions about your relationship and your future. But you shouldn't
do it alone. There are organizations and support groups out there who can
help. If you girlfriend isn't willing to go with you, you should seek help for
yourself -- otherwise the resentment and pain you feel will just continue to
grow. Please visit our healing page for more information on finding free and
confidential, non-judgmental help after abortion. You can also find articles
and information for men here. You are not alone -- there are people out there
who know what you are going through and want to support you.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/7dd533f95ac30ffe87c3426c76f5e623?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Maira sheikh on March 11, 2016 at 8:48 am said:

Great information that every woman should know about. Killing an innocent baby
who has not yet opened eyes in this world does not deserve death……. Stop
killing babies..

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/2de453c31a665b5692c1e0464b8597dd?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Julie brown on March 11, 2016 at 6:54 am said:

Why killing the innocent soul due to your fault. Avoid abortion, love your
baby.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/a6041b0b4a3b0009255871383246b984?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Chris on March 1, 2016 at 7:28 pm said:

A guy approached me today narrating how he got a lady pregnant, although am
working in a hospital as scientist. But I actually booked an appointment to
talk it over with them. The duo have a strong determination to abort the
barely two weeks old foetus. What strong advice should render to make the give
up their plan? Thanks

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on March 1, 2016 at 7:47 pm said:
    

I would encourage them to carefully study the risk factors which identify the
women who are most likely to suffer more severe psychological reactions to
abortion. It is likely that the woman has multiple risk factors.

They should also look at the studies that demonstrate the elevated incidence
of psychological and physical problems associated with abortion, including
reduced life expectancy.

Bottom line: Abortion can make sense to the head, but it is not easily
reconciled at the level of the heart. Many women will end up regretting their
abortions; very few ever regret giving birth to their children, even when the
child was unplanned.

All the reasons for abortion make sense here and now, at this moment, but the
reasons won't stand up against the self questioning and self rebukes which
follow. Abortion doesn't turn back the clock. It doesn't make everything the
way it was as if you never became pregnant. Their lives are already changed.
They are already parents of a real, living human child. The question is
whether they will ever hold the child, or whether they will always wonder
about what it would have been like to hold it.

The idea that abortion will turn back time is one of it's most dangerous lies.
The choice is not whether or not to be parents, but whether or not they will
be parents of a live child or an aborted one. While a live child involves
burdens, and aborted child is not without it's own costs.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/bbc6e010774f28dc71886e76cf882606?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Luke V. on February 25, 2016 at 7:42 am said:

After reading it, abortion is never the answer, there other ways through it.
don't do it, it's not if it is safe or not, it is that you are killing someone
who is innocent, look, if every child had a decision between to be "born" or
"aborted", I guarantee 100% of the babies, the would say to be born.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6d1d9bebd79a330a194fc267ac12b86e?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Fr. James Rosselli on February 25, 2016 at 12:46 am said:

To those whose parents have threatened to throw you out if you don't  
murder your baby: what would your reaction be if they said you couldn't  
stay unless you shot your boyfriend? It's he same thing, you know. Only,  
abortion is easier because you don't have to look your victim in the eye,and
you can hire a hit-man in a white coat cheaper than his mob  
counterpart.

Your parents are telling you to do an evil thing, whether they think they are
or not. And they are taking advantage of the fact that you are  
scared and feel alone and helpless. That may not be their intent, but that's
what they're doing.

You are not alone There are people out there who will help you through  
your pregnancy and even give you a place to stay, who will arrange  
adoption or help you adjust to being a single mom.

Go talk to your local crisis pregnancy ministry, state or city right-to-life
organization, or just drop in at your local Catholic church (they're the ones
who have the most aggressive pro-life ministries)  
and tell them you need help.

Or, for that matter, you can write me, and I'll refer you to people  
who can help.

You are not alone. You are not helpless. You have friends, you just  
haven't met them, yet.

You can reach me at: arimathea@priest.com

Blessings,

Fr. James Rosselli  
St. Joseph of Arimathea Orthodox Church  
and House of Prayer  
La Porte, Indiana

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9fcca0d90002d2edb6f5afe5bc663888?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)I k nagoriya on January 29, 2016 at 5:36 am said:

Change the abortion thinking

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1058bea9a91f34095a93ab509e9b0cf2?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)sameeer on December 1, 2015 at 7:10 pm said:

I have 5 months old baby . Unexpectedly my wife have pregnant in this month.
What should we do ?  
Is abortion will better options.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on December 1, 2015 at 7:53 pm said:
    

I strongly discourage an abortion. It will expose your wife to much greater
mental health risks and long term physical risks, including a shortened
lifespan. It is also likely that she has multiple risk factors for more severe
reactions than other women. Finally, having an abortion may make it more
difficult for her to bond with and raise your five-month-old baby.

Please trust that this unborn child is a great gift to you, your wife, and
your already born baby. It may be hard work caring for two little ones, but
they will be the best of friends and will bring joy into your life that you
will never regret. An abortion, on the other hand, will leave all of you with
a life time of regrets.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/eaa48089e7838b55a4281bbd30902afa?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Tasha on November 10, 2015 at 6:07 pm said:

Hello, my girlfriend had an abortion last year november, but since then her
period has not been a regular cycle like it used to be,,, what should she do?

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a017b4b3009def624194e7943c14065?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Dan on September 23, 2015 at 9:17 pm said:

thanks for the information

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a017b4b3009def624194e7943c14065?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Dan on September 22, 2015 at 9:17 pm said:

my girlfriend want to go for abortion because her mother says she cant stay
with her if she doesnt do abortion and i feel so helpless because i dont have
a job and my girl friend she is 19 years old and am 20 years old. i dont know
wht to do please help me, from South Africa ….

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on September 22, 2015 at 11:10 pm said:
    

Hi Dan, I don't know where you are located in South Africa, but there are
organizations that can offer help to you and your girlfriend to have the
child. She doesn't have to abort, even if she feels like she has no other
choice or if her mother is threatening to make her leave. I have included a
list below of organizations that offer free and confidential help. Please
contact us again if you need more help!

http://ramahinternational.org/help-in-your-area/international/  
http://www.optionsgeorge.com/  
http://www.lifechoicesbenoni.co.za/contact_us.html  
http://birthright.org/en/landingpage/lp-johannesburg  
http://www.joytothenations.co.za/heart.php  
http://www.crisispregnancy.org.za/  
http://www.pccofhope.org.za/contact-us.html  
http://healthymomandbabyclinic.com/crisis-pregnancy-counselling.html  
http://www.choices.org.za/counseling.html

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9797f19d0c069e2828700d44aa836776?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)ogunbona Enitan on August 27, 2015 at 12:12 pm said:

Ennitan,i had an abortion four times,when I was in school because then I am
not ready for a baby but now that am married, a years ago have been praying to
God to forgive all my sins bcos then I don't know what am doin,I just want to
be sure if I can still concieve.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9f9bc85d81fa477ba64163649b2fc2d8?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Ella sung on December 4, 2014 at 9:46 am said:

I had an Abortion before 4 month when i was 6 weeks pregnant. For last one
month i am trying to conceive but i can't though i have regular period every
month. Can you please tell me the reason behind that or any suggestion. I am
really worried.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on December 4, 2014 at 5:09 pm said:
    

Hi Ella, if you have any concerns about your health and your ability to
conceive you should visit a doctor. Be sure to let him or her know about your
medical history and any symptoms you are having. The doctor should be able to
tell you if you need to be concerned and what treatment might be available if
you are having problems.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/928f44a55a7f17439ba0a5c09b47eac0?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)zhenzhen on September 11, 2014 at 2:25 am said:

I had a an abortion eariler this year when I was still a student studying my
master degree. My boyfriend was supportive and tried to persuade me to keep
it, but I felt that I didn't have the capability to bring up a baby. Also
because I am from a very conservative culture, being pregnant before marriage
is considered to be a huge shame.

Due to all kinds of pressure, I aborted that baby. Now half of a year past, I
become more and more anxious and frightened psychologically. I feel that it
was a huge mistake in my life and I feel shameful for myself. I can't talk to
anyone about my true feelings I feel very helpless sometimes. Sometimes in my
mind I always blame my boyfriend for this, I doubt that it is him make me
pregnant on purpose. He knows I am not planning to be pregnant but he
sometimes insist not using condoms. His selfishness and this abortion
experience make me lose confidence in this relationship too. I really wish
nothing happened ever. 🙁

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on September 11, 2014 at 9:24 pm said:
    

Please read on page with tips on finding post-abortion healing support. It
sounds like you may not be in the United States, so programs may be harder to
find. But some Christian churches and pregnancy help centers (if any) in your
area may be able to refer you to a program or support group.

You are in our prayers.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/6e37eeb32890ec93d3942351403bd9a5?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Ryen on September 9, 2014 at 3:44 am said:

Ive done an abortion 1 week ago. my bf didn't ask me if its ok with me to go
abortion. we got aborted the baby,i didn't contradict his decision..after 3
days I got confined to the hospital to do an operation because there were
retained products of conception and blood clots in my ultrasound. and now 4
days after I got confined in the hospital ive been having dizziness and eating
disorders and afraid of getting pregnant..what should I do?

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on September 9, 2014 at 4:02 pm said:
    

I'm not a doctor. Regarding any physical symptoms, you should go see a doctor
your trust if you are experiencing anything that concerns you.

Regarding your emotional recovery, at some point you may benefit from seeking
the support of other women who have been through an abortion and found healing
by contacting a post-abortion healing program. Please don't settle for just
"getting by," much less "suffering in silence." Get help to work through your
feelings of loss before they sink in deep and begin to fester.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/b849f8bef381cd0ada34fe55cdede84e?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Adush on August 27, 2014 at 3:20 pm said:

hello,  
am 19yrs old, my girlfriend is pregnant and she wants to abort the child as we
are not mentally and financially prepared. should i support her in this
decision??? she is 21 yrs old.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on August 27, 2014 at 9:52 pm said:
    

Hi Adush, thanks for posting. I don't know your exact situation, but you and
your girlfriend are probably pretty scared about the future right now and
about what having a baby could mean. Maybe other people are scared for you too
and telling you that you can't have a baby or abortion is the only thing to
do. You sound like you want to be there for your girlfriend, so let her know
you care about her and your baby. This is a huge, life-altering decision and
you should find out everything you can, talk with people who will tell you
about the risks and other options you might have, and offer you good support
and resources.

Here are some places to start:

Find out about the risks of abortion before you have one. Abortion clinics and
even your girlfriend's doctor might not know or give you this information.
They might tell you that abortion is safe and there is no risk. But aside from
the physical risks, it is widely accepted that certain women are more likely
to have problems after abortion. You should check out this page and see if you
and your girlfriend fall into any of these categories: If you do, it might
mean that you could have a harder time dealing with the abortion afterward.
https://afterabortion.org/2011/risk-factors-for-psychological-problems-after-
abortion/

Find out about other options. There are many resources out there to help that
you might not be aware of. I’m not saying it will be easy, but many women and
men who go through abortions end up with regrets afterward, even if they think
or were told it was the right decision at the time. Please visit here for
information on pregnancy support centers: http://www.optionline.org/get-help.

There is also an organization called The Nurturing Network that can help with
things like housing, finding a job, staying in or going to school, etc.
http://nurturingnetwork.org/‎ All the help they give is free and confidential.

I hope this helps. Please know that, no matter what anyone says, you DON'T
have to have an abortion and there are other options -- and people who will
help.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/cf70f27cd775611d1a82c0ab6f2060c0?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Kacey Ong on August 5, 2014 at 3:52 am said:

I am having cramps, serious cramps but no sign of period and pregnancy…. help?

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on August 5, 2014 at 4:07 am said:
    

I'm not a doctor, nor could a doctor diagnose you from just a report of
cramps. I strongly urge you to see a doctor or seek nursing help or a referral
through a pregnancy help center.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/dcbcb8b58602e732266fcd41a86df166?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Allison on July 18, 2014 at 3:13 pm said:

I had an abortion 2yrs ago bcoz the baby died inside my womb and it's been a
week dead. A midwife provided a Meds to abort the baby. The baby came out just
like a normal delivery except that baby is just 6months old and dead. Now, I
have health issues. Been having Eating disorders and lately being sickly.
Also, been trying to get pregnant again but no luck. What should I do? I'm
honestly very worried. Is it still possible for me to bear a child?

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on July 18, 2014 at 7:21 pm said:
    

I'm not a doctor, but from everything I understand there is no reason to
believe that you can not bear a child in the future. It is possible that your
eating disorders are making it harder for you to become pregnant again.

Hang onto hope. Things can get better and you may soon have the baby you
desire. If you have access to a doctor, go see him or her and discuss your
situation. For some people, it may take a year or two of trying to become
pregnant. You might want to start tracking your cycle to see when the most
fertile days are to increase the chances of becoming pregnant. There are easy
ways to become more aware of your fertility that you can read about here. and
elsewhere.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/5d22a50067281edeab97f29aeab67f45?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)rama sudheendra on March 29, 2014 at 9:25 pm said:

I am 34 yr old I have sufgering from pcod i had 3 abortions in 5th month I
have one child 6yr old for the first baby I did cervicalcerclage but after
other pregnency I don't .for the second pregnencyeverything is normal up to
5th month but after doctor told me that it is dead inside. After that
pregnancy immediate two month s later I had another pregnancy it is also
normal up to 4yh month but it is also dead in the last of fourth month again
they did the abortion. I notice the problem when I g  
ot pregnency I suffer from light chill and fever please tell me having all
these problems shall I take another chance of pregnancy

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/1a4c0228bd38c52a6a9b8848beac199f?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Amy at Elliot Institute on March 31, 2014 at 8:52 pm said:
    

I'm very sorry for your losses and the health problems you have been through.
I would suggest talking to your doctor or getting a doctor's opinion on any
specific health problems you have. You might also want to check out the
American Association of Pro-life Ob/Gyn web site at http://www.aaplog.org.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/71b640f11d4f2d9ed253b2e3f880a04c?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Lukas M. on January 30, 2014 at 2:00 am said:

Thank you for this information, I will be using some of these facts to
convince people to be against abortion.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/eefe0bd92fd7a148763f1f9475a6f77a?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)Precious c on December 5, 2013 at 9:46 am said:

I have done 2 different abortions which am forced to do 2 years back and now
am having psychological trauma and always have this guilty feelings if I have
not develop any complications especially in my future pregnancy, and will
always need an advice on how to find out if there is any and means of solving
pls

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on December 6, 2013 at 3:21 pm said:
    

Please read our page of tips and resources for finding a post-abortion healing
program.

Regarding your future pregnancies, when you become pregnant be sure to tell
your doctor that you have a history of two abortions and that you are
concerned about the heightened risk of premature birth and miscarriage. There
are techniques that can be used to reduce the risk of miscarriage or premature
birth and a doctor who is aware of your increased risk can take these
appropriate steps.

Don't give into despair. Find a post-abortion healing program where you can
get the emotional support and help you need to regain a sense of peace in your
heart. You will never forget the children you've lost, but you can work
through the grief and find a sense of peace.

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9458470252386ee8527f631dd4e9bbc8?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Fr. James Rosselli on May 11, 2015 at 10:18 pm said:
    

Yes, there is!

You need to get right with God. People often view God as some cosmic  
Bad Guy, Who is out to zap them for doing wrong. Nothing could be farther  
from the truth.

God loves you. He desires your healing and salvation. In Christ, you will find
both.

For your specific situation, I'd suggest you get in touch with your local
Women's Care Center or any church affiliated with your local Right-to-Life
office.

Reply ↓

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/bbc6e010774f28dc71886e76cf882606?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Luke V. on February 25, 2016 at 5:32 am said:
    

I am so happy that you have said that, God bless you man. I support you very
much

Reply ↓

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8239dd216e959afe6979e77088ba99f7?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Jose Cavalcante on May 6, 2016 at 5:29 pm said:
    

Probably that´s right. I´m atheist, but in some cases I encourage people to go
to the church, or a buddhist center, a mosque, or something similar. I believe
that religion is something that is more than salvation, is something related
with direction, counseling, hope. Hope is what any human being wants to
his/her life, and religion gives hope, so maybe it should be good in those
cases.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/4a0dcbdab38e00dd5005aab4e6179211?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)FLORENCE on September 10, 2013 at 3:44 pm said:

MY BOYFREND FORCE ME TWO COMET ABORTION

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on September 10, 2013 at 4:29 pm said:
    

Our prayers go out to you Florence. It doesn't sound like your boyfriend is
committed to loving you. It seems like a bad relationship. You deserve better.
I also hope you will look into programs that can help you heal from the your
past abortions.

Reply ↓

  1. ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f0bcb35264c9f35a76dac59f0c118939?s=40&d=identicon&r=g)J.Johnson on July 2, 2013 at 2:29 am said:

Im strongly against abortions, BUT, i am a mother of a 2 yr old and 5wks
pregnant with another baby. I think my boyfriend is trying to talk me into
getting an abortion. I dont know what to do at the moment, because i can
hardly take care of the child i have already from a previous relationship. I
just need advice…

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on July 2, 2013 at 5:22 am said:
    

Please check out our pregnancy help page to find resources to help you with
friendship, good advise, financial support, and more.

Don't give into any pressure or manipulations to have an abortion. Ask him to
read about abortion risks on our web site and to read the testimonies of both
women and men. Help him to see that abortion is not a simple fix, as he hopes,
but rather a negative choice that could damage both of you for life . . .
especially because you are strongly against abortion. Asking you to betray
your conscience, and your child, is not loving. He needs to stand up as a man
and protect you and his child . . . not endanger both of you because of the
misguided hope that abortion is a "quick fix." Hopefully he will understand
this once he educates himself.

In either event, whether he becomes supportive or continues to encourage the
idea of having an abortion, you need to expand your support network by
contacting a pregnancy help center and reaching out to friends and family
members who will give you emotional support and who will reinforce your
decision to protect your child and yourself from an unwanted abortion.

You are in our prayers. Please let us know if and when you boyfriend starts
offering you the support you deserve. If he doesn't, please let us know if you
have found the help you need through a pregnancy help center.

Reply ↓

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/fa574c3612288152e0d4bfbef0fab82b?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)shila shigare on July 12, 2014 at 5:16 am said:
    

am stressed up because my man want abortion

Reply ↓

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on July 14, 2014 at 12:16 am said:
    

I'd suggest a few things.

First, call a pregnancy help line listed on this page to get support and
advise.

Second, have him read some of the testimonies of women who have been hurt by
abortion. If he truly loved you, he wouldn't want to risk having you go
through the same nightmare.

Third, stand strong for yourself and your baby. If he's just using you, then
it's better to see through him now than after you have lost your child and
your the person you want to be.

Don't give up hope! Stand firm for what you believe.

You are in our prayers. Please call one of the help lines for support.

    
    
      * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f77e462abe171f7a4c444cbda1661253?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Awala Temitope on April 29, 2017 at 1:18 pm said:
    

my man want me to abort

Reply ↓

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/c42bbd3543adaa151db06b497ede5384?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)EI on April 29, 2017 at 4:06 pm said:
    

That's because he doesn't know how much it will hurt you emotionally,
psychologically, and physically. Or (I hope it's not true), he's too selfish
to care about what it does to you or the baby.

Stand up for yourself and the baby. If he's a good man, his attitudes will
change. He will get over the fears of having new responsibilities and will
embrace the joys of being a good father. If he's not a good man, you are
better off without him. Don't damage your soul, your heart, your mind or your
body to satisfy the demands of a selfish man.

Keep your baby. In the end, your child (and future children) will be your
greatest treasure and pride. Having an abortion will be your greatest tragedy
that you will carry with you always. Choose the treasure, not the grief.

Ask your man to read about the risks of abortion. Have him read about the risk
factors that put you at greatest risk. If he's a good man and truly loves you,
this will change his mind.

Please keep in touch. Let us know how we can help you.

You are in my prayers.

Do you want to hear from other women who have been in the same situation? If
so, I will send out an invitation for them to add comments on the page where
you commented and you should receive copies of their comments by email. (They
won't have access to your email address. But the website will forward their
messages to you). Let me know if the advice of more people may be helpful.

    
    
        * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f77e462abe171f7a4c444cbda1661253?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Temitope on April 29, 2017 at 5:16 pm said:
    

Please pray along with me and also I will like to hear those testimony of
others women thank you

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/9458470252386ee8527f631dd4e9bbc8?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)Fr. James Rosselli on May 11, 2015 at 10:12 pm said:
    

This is a two-year-old post, but for those in similar situations, the  
best route is adoption. It's not a complex process, and you will have all the
help you need along the way. Call any Women's Care Center  
office, or any Right-to-Life organization, for information. You will  
be astounded at the amount of help that's out there for you!

Reply ↓

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8c5492f9be6388f90299415176251962?s=32&d=identicon&r=g)kerra sancez on December 16, 2015 at 2:19 am said:
    

first of all if you can't take care of the baby don't abort their is adoptions
My aunt is adopted and she is one of the best people in my family just last
year i got to meet her birth mom and she was in a situation simler to yours
but she knew abortion was not the awner instend she give the baby up to a
family she knew would love and care for her. also thir is closed and open
adoption so you could still be in your childs life

Reply ↓

# Comment navigation

Newer Comments ->

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Subscribe to comment

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is
processed.

### Search

Search for:

### Support Our Work

![](https://www.paypal.com/en_US/i/scr/pixel.gif)

### Help Us, Help You

Stay Informed. Join our List.  
Name  
Email

### Follow Us

![Facebook](https://afterabortion.org/wp-content/plugins/ultimate-social-

media-plus/images/icons_theme/default/default_fb.png)

![Facebook](https://afterabortion.org/wp-content/plugins/ultimate-social-

media-plus/images/visit_icons/Visit_us_fb/icon_Visit_us_en_US.png)

![Twitter](https://afterabortion.org/wp-content/plugins/ultimate-social-media-

plus/images/icons_theme/default/default_twitter.png)

![Visit Us](https://afterabortion.org/wp-content/plugins/ultimate-social-

media-plus/images/visit_icons/Visit_us_twitter/icon_Visit_us_en_US.png)

Follow

![YOUTUBE](https://afterabortion.org/wp-content/plugins/ultimate-social-media-

plus/images/icons_theme/default/default_youtube.png)

![YOUTUBE](https://afterabortion.org/wp-content/plugins/ultimate-social-media-

plus/images/visit_icons/youtube.png)

### Recent Posts

  * It Takes a Village … To Abort a Child
  * After 46 Years, Legalized Abortion Has Done Nothing to Help Women
  * Parents Concerned by Rise in Abortion for Down Syndrome
  * Abortion Contributes to Mental Health Problems: Both Sides Agree According to a Comprehensive Medical Review
  * How to Help Someone You Love Heal After An Abortion

### Recent Comments

  * Tifity on Study Claiming Women Don't Regret Abortions Deeply Flawed and Deceptive
  * EI on Repeat Abortions: What the Research Says
  * Janet keyman on Repeat Abortions: What the Research Says
  * Amy at Elliot Institute on Denying the Loss of a Sibling: Healing for Those Who Have Lost Siblings to Abortion
  * L on Denying the Loss of a Sibling: Healing for Those Who Have Lost Siblings to Abortion

### Our Other Sites

  * Abortion Risks
  * Church Awareness Project
  * Stop Forced Abortions
  * The UnChoice

Terms of Use | Permission to Reprint | Contact Us

.  
![](https://www.afterabortion.org/image/logo2As.jpg)

© Elliot Institute Proudly powered by WordPress Weaver II by WP Weaver

↑

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

