

__Menu

  * About
  * Data
  * Documentation
  * Focal Points Portal
  * Bureau Portal
  * Links

###### Languages __

  * Arabic
  * Chinese
  * Français
  * Russian
  * ESPAÑOL

__ Search

  * Reports
  * Working Groups
  * Activities
  * News
  * Calendar

__Follow

__Share

##### Latest and Upcoming Report

  * Global Warming of 1.5°C
  * 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories
  * Climate Change and Land
  * The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate

##### Sixth Assessment Report

  * AR6 Synthesis Report: Climate Change 2022
  * AR6 Climate Change 2021: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability
  * AR6 Climate Change 2021: Mitigation of Climate Change
  * AR6 Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis

##### Fifth Assessment Report

  * AR5 Synthesis Report: Climate Change 2014
  * AR5 Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis
  * AR5 Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability
  * AR5 Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change

View all

##### Working Group I

  * About
  * Reports
  * Resources
  * Activities
  * News
  * Co-Chairs
  * Vice Chairs
  * TSU Staff
  * Contact

##### Working Group II

  * About
  * Reports
  * Activities
  * News
  * Co-Chairs
  * Vice-Chairs
  * TSU Staff
  * Contact

##### Working Group III

  * About
  * Reports
  * Activities
  * News
  * Co-Chairs
  * Vice-Chairs
  * TSU Staff
  * Contact

##### TFI

  * About
  * Organization
  * Reports
  * Activities
  * TFB Co-Chairs
  * TFB Members
  * TSU Staff
  * Contact

# IPCC Data

### The Task Group on Data Support for Climate Change Assessments aims to

provide guidance to the IPCC’s Data Distribution Centre on curation,
traceability, stability, availability and transparency of data and scenarios
related to the reports of the IPCC.

##### Follow

* * *

##### Engage

There are many ways to engage with the IPCC

__

##### Learn More

Learn more

## Task Group on Data Support for Climate Change Assessments (TG-Data)

TG-Data aims to provide guidance to the Data Distribution Centre (DDC) on
curation, traceability, stability, availability and transparency of data and
scenarios related to the reports of the IPCC. Together with the DDC, the Task
Group facilitates the availability and consistent use of climate change-
related data and scenarios in support of the implementation of the IPCC’s
programme of work.

TG-Data replaces the Task Group on Data and Scenario Support for Impact and
Climate Analysis (TGICA) whose mandate was to facilitate the distribution and
application of climate change related data and scenarios to enable research
and sharing of information across the three IPCC Working Groups.

At its 47th Session on 13-16 March 2018, the IPCC adopted Decision IPCC-
XLVII-9 where TGICA was renamed to Task Group on Data Support for Climate
Change Assessments (TG-Data) with new Terms of Reference for TG-Data as well
as Guidance for the Data Distribution Centre (DDC).

#### **Membership**

New members of TG-Data were selected during the 56th Session of the IPCC
Bureau held in Geneva in March 2019.

The Task Group will be co-chaired by David Huard from Canada and Sebastian
Vicuna from Chile. The other members are:

  * Kornelis Blok (Netherlands),
  * Steven Crimp (Australia),
  * Sha Fu (China),
  * Wawan Gunawan (Indonesia),
  * José Manuel Gutiérrez (Spain),
  * Michio Kawamiya (Japan),
  * Nana Ama Browne Klutse (Ghana),
  * Volker Krey (Germany),
  * Silvina Solman (Argentina),
  * Gerard van der Schrier (Netherlands),
  * Michele Warburton-Toucher (South Africa), and
  * Rachel Warren (United Kingdom).

## Data Distribution Centre (DDC)

The Data Distribution Centre (DDC) provides climate, socio-economic and
environmental data, both from the past and also in scenarios projected into
the future. Technical guidelines on the selection and use of different types
of data and scenarios in research and assessment are also provided. The DDC is
designed primarily for climate change researchers, but materials contained on
the site may also be of interest to educators, governmental and non-
governmental organizations as well as the general public.

To access the DDC, click here.

## Emission Factor Database (EFDB)

The Emission Factor Database (EFDB) is a project supported by the National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme (NGGIP), which is managed by the IPCC
Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI).

EFDB is intended to be a recognized library, where users can find emission
factors and other parameters with background documentation or technical
references that can be used for estimating greenhouse gas emissions and
removals. The responsibility for using this information appropriately remains
with the users themselves.

To access the EFDB, click here.

#### Follow the IPCC

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is active socially –
choose your network:

* * *

#### Engage with the IPCC

There are many ways to be involved and participate in the IPCC world.

Learn more

#### The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

![IPCC | WHO |

UNEP](https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/themes/ipcc/resources/img/footer_logos.png)

  * Reports
  * Working Groups
  * Activities
  * News
  * Calendar

![Designed by Habitat

Seven](https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/themes/ipcc/resources/img/h7.png)

__

Search for:

__

### Reports

##### Latest and Upcoming Report

  * Global Warming of 1.5°C
  * 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories
  * Climate Change and Land
  * The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate

##### Sixth Assessment Report

  * AR6 Synthesis Report: Climate Change 2022
  * AR6 Climate Change 2021: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability
  * AR6 Climate Change 2021: Mitigation of Climate Change
  * AR6 Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis

##### Fifth Assessment Report

  * AR5 Synthesis Report: Climate Change 2014
  * AR5 Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis
  * AR5 Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability
  * AR5 Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change

View all

### Working Groups

##### Working Group I

  * About
  * Reports
  * Resources
  * Activities
  * News
  * Co-Chairs
  * Vice Chairs
  * TSU Staff
  * Contact

##### Working Group II

  * About
  * Reports
  * Activities
  * News
  * Co-Chairs
  * Vice-Chairs
  * TSU Staff
  * Contact

##### Working Group III

  * About
  * Reports
  * Activities
  * News
  * Co-Chairs
  * Vice-Chairs
  * TSU Staff
  * Contact

##### TFI

  * About
  * Organization
  * Reports
  * Activities
  * TFB Co-Chairs
  * TFB Members
  * TSU Staff
  * Contact

### Activities

##### Lead Author Meetings

#### Third Lead Author Meeting of the IPCC Working Group I Sixth Assessment

Report

From 26 to 30 August 2019, IPCC Working Group I will organise the Third Lead
Author Meeting (LAM3) of the …

###### August 26, 2019

Explore

##### Vacancies

#### IPCC Working Group III Senior Scientist (Research Fellow)

Job Summary: The Centre for Environmental Policy wishes to appoint a Research
Fellow as a Senior Scientist within the Technical …

###### June 2019

Explore

##### Obituary

#### Obituary: Sergio Patricio Emanuel González

It is with deep sorrow that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) has learnt of the death of the …

###### June 2019

Explore

View all

* * *

__Menu

__Top

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

