

Skip to main content

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/logo.png)

  * Home
  * News & Features
  * Maps & Data
  * Teaching Climate
  * About
  * Contact
  * FAQs
  * Site Map
  * What's New?
  * El Niño & La Niña

## Climate news, stories, images, & video (ClimateWatch Magazine)

  * News
  * How the Climate System Works
  * Climate Change & Global Warming
  * Natural Climate Patterns
  * Climate Impacts
  * Observing & Predicting
  * Policy & Planning
  * Extreme Events

  * Home

  * News & Features
  * Understanding Climate
  * Climate Change: Global Temperature

## Climate Change: Global Temperature

Author:

Rebecca Lindsey and LuAnn Dahlman

August 1, 2018

![](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/icon_print.png)

Given the size and tremendous heat capacity of the global oceans, it takes a
massive amount of accumulated heat energy to raise Earth’s average yearly
surface temperature even a small amount. Behind the seemingly small increase
in global average surface temperature over the past century is a significant
increase in accumulated heat. That extra heat is driving regional and seasonal
temperature extremes, reducing snow cover and sea ice, intensifying heavy
rainfall, and changing habitat ranges for plants and animals—expanding some
and shrinking others.

**History of global surface temperature since 1880**

_**Explore this interactive graph:** Click and drag to display different parts
of the graph. To squeeze or stretch the graph in either direction, hold your
Shift key down, then click and drag. The graph shows average annual global
temperatures since 1880 (source data) compared to the long-term average
(1901-2000). The zero line represents the long-term average temperature for
the whole planet; blue and red bars show the difference above or below average
for each year._

### Conditions in 2017

According to the American Meteorological Society's _State of the Climate in
2017_ , the year brought an end to the three-year streak of new record
temperatures that were set each year from 2014­­­­­–2016. Depending on the
data set used, 2017 came in second or third warmest, after 2016 (warmest) and
2015 (second or third warmest). The near-record temperatures occurred in the
absence of El Niño, which is usually a factor in extreme global warmth. For
much of 2017, El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) conditions were neutral, and
October 2017 brought the start of La Niña, which typically drops global
temperatures. Despite this, 2017 readings were 0.38­–0.48° Celsius (0.68–0.86°
Fahrenheit) above the 1981–2010 average, depending on the dataset. It was the
warmest non-El Niño year in the instrumental record.

![global map of 2017 surface temperature compared to average, with reds

showing warm areas and blues showing cool

areas](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/SotC2017_01_GlobalSurfaceTemps_map_800x450.png)

Global surface temperature in 2017 compared to the 1981-2010 average. High
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere were especially warm, though temperatures
across most of the planet were warmer than average (red colors). NOAA
Climate.gov map, based on data from NOAA NCEI.

### Change over time

Though warming has not been uniform across the planet, the upward trend in the
globally averaged temperature shows that more areas are warming than cooling.
Since 1901, the planet’s surface has warmed by 0.7–0.9° Celsius (1.3–1.6°
Fahrenheit) per century, but the rate of warming has nearly doubled since 1975
to 1.5–1.8° Celsius (2.7–3.2° Fahrenheit) per century, according to the
international _State of the Climate in 2017_report.

The 10 warmest years on record have all occurred since 1998, and the four
warmest years on record have all occurred since 2014. Looking back to 1988, a
pattern emerges: except for 2011, as each new year is added to the history, it
becomes one of the top 10 warmest on record at that time, but it is ultimately
replaced as the “top ten” window shifts forward in time.

By 2020, models project that global surface temperature will be more than
0.5°C (0.9°F) warmer than the 1986-2005 average, regardless of which carbon
dioxide emissions pathway the world follows. This similarity in temperatures
regardless of total emissions is a short-term phenomenon: it reflects the
tremendous inertia of Earth's vast oceans. The high heat capacity of water
means that ocean temperature doesn't react instantly to the increased heat
being trapped by greenhouse gases. By 2030, however, the heating imbalance
caused by greenhouse gases begins to overcome the oceans' thermal inertia, and
projected temperature pathways begin to diverge, with unchecked carbon dioxide
emissions likely leading to several additional degrees of warming by the end
of the century.

### About surface temperature

The concept of an average temperature for the entire globe may seem odd. After
all, at this very moment, the highest and lowest temperatures on Earth are
likely more than 100°F (55°C) apart. Temperatures vary from night to day and
between seasonal extremes in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. This means
that some parts of Earth are quite cold while other parts are downright hot.
To speak of the "average" temperature, then, may seem like nonsense. However,
the concept of a global average temperature is convenient for detecting and
tracking changes in Earth's energy budget—how much sunlight Earth absorbs
minus how much it radiates to space as heat—over time.

To calculate a global average temperature, scientists begin with temperature
measurements taken at locations around the globe. Because their goal is to
track _changes_ in temperature, measurements are converted from absolute
temperature readings to temperature anomalies—the difference between the
observed temperature and the long-term average temperature for each location
and date. Multiple independent research groups across the world perform their
own analysis of the surface temperature data, and they all show a similar
upward trend.

![graph of yearly surface temperature from different data sets in different

colors](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/SotC2017_01_GlobalSurfaceTemps_graph_800x450.png)

Yearly global surface temperature from 1900–2017 compared to the 1981-2010
average (dashed line). The different colors represent different research
groups' analysis of the historical temperature record. NOAA Climate.gov graph
adapted from _State of the Climate in 2017. _ Details on the datasets can be
found in Table 2.1 and Figure 2.1 in the report.

Across inaccessible areas that have few measurements, scientists use
surrounding temperatures and other information to estimate the missing values.
Each value is then used to calculate a global temperature average. This
process provides a consistent, reliable method for monitoring changes in
Earth's surface temperature over time. Read more about how the global surface
temperature record is built in our Climate Data Primer.

### References

Sánchez-Lugo, A., Morice, C., Berrisford, P., Argüez, A. (2018). Temperature
[in _State of the Climate in 2017_ ]. Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society, 99(8), S11–S13.

NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information, State of the Climate:
Global Climate Report for Annual 2017, published online January 2018,
retrieved on August 2, 2018 from https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/global/201713.

IPCC, 2013: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group 1 to the 5th Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K.
Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and
P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA.

### Interactive graph data

Annual global temperature anomalies for land and ocean combined, expressed as
departures from the 1901-2000 average. National Climatic Data Center.

![](/sites/default/files/End_Symbol_465_0.gif)

Do you have feedback to offer on this or another article?  
Let us know what you think.

Highlights:

  * Based on NOAA data, the 2017 average global temperature across land and ocean surface areas was 0.84°C (1.51°F) above the twentieth-century average of 13.9°C (57.0°F), making it the third-warmest year on record behind 2016 (warmest) and 2015 (second warmest). It was the warmest non-El-Niño year in the record. 
  * Global temperature hasn't been cooler than the twentieth-century average since 1976. 
  * Since the start of the twenty-first century, the annual global temperature record has been broken five times.
  * From 1900 to 1980 a new temperature record was set on average every 13.5 years; however, since 1981 it has increased to every 3 years.

Rating:

Select ratingGive Climate Change: Global Temperature 1/5Give Climate Change:
Global Temperature 2/5Give Climate Change: Global Temperature 3/5Give Climate
Change: Global Temperature 4/5Give Climate Change: Global Temperature 5/5

Average: 3.7 (236 votes)

Share This:

Tags:

temperature

dashboard

Topics:

Climate Data

Category:

How the Climate System Works

Climate Change & Global Warming

Observing & Predicting

Department:

Understanding Climate

Reviewer:

Jessica Blunden

Related

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/climatewatch//2009/10/maunaloa2.jpg?itok=tqQqPYmt)

## Carbon Dioxide: Earth's Hottest Topic is Just Warming Up

October 21, 2009

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/tiny_teaser_all/public/annualtempanimation_480.jpg?itok=YMPuW2kg)

## History of Earth's temperature since 1880

January 16, 2015

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/Comic_RollerCoaster_610.jpg?itok=gFQJUO8l)

## What’s the hottest Earth has been “lately”?

September 17, 2014

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/tiny_teaser_all/public/Comic_RollerCoaster_610.jpg?itok=QCHgz9t3)

## Earth's temperature history as a roller coaster

April 25, 2016

## You Might Like

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/2011_strattempanom_480.jpg?itok=hP_abT5V)

## State of the Climate: 2011 Stratospheric Temperature

July 10, 2012

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/Min%20Arctic%20Sea%20Ice%20DBLanding_480_0.png?itok=W6sxREe-)

## Climate Change: Minimum Arctic Sea Ice Extent

March 20, 2019

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/NFgreatlakesicerotatormap.jpg?itok=mqq6C9Bq)

## Great Lakes ice cover decreasing over last 40 years

July 9, 2018

![](https://www.climate.gov/sites/default/files/styles/nf-tiny-

teaser/public/_DSC2332%20CroninMDCU_480_0.jpg?itok=l48gzjss)

## The day before yesterday: when abrupt climate change came to the Chesapeake

Bay

March 7, 2014

![climate.gov](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/footer-logo.jpg)

  * Home
  * News & Features
  * Maps & Data
  * Teaching Climate

  * About

  * Contact
  * FAQs
  * Site Map
  * What's New?

Follow Climate.gov

![Follow us on twitter](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/twitter-foot.png)

![Follow us on Facebook](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/facebook-foot.png)

![Follow us on Instagram](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/instagram-

foot.png)

![Subscription link to sign up for Climate.gov's weekly update

newsletter](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/button_subscribe_sm.png)

2014 Webby Award winning website

![Webby Award](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/webby_green.png) ![Webby

Award](/sites/all/themes/custom/mu/images/webby_govt.png)

Click each award to learn more

  * Information Quality
  * NOAA Freedom of Information Act 
  * Privacy Policy
  * Disclaimer
  * USA.gov
  * ready.gov

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

