

World Travel Guide

CLOSE

  *     * Search
  * Country Guides

  * City Guides
  * Features
  * Food & Drink
  * Flights
  * Hotels in Stockholm

![](https://www.worldtravelguide.net/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Think-Sweden-

Stockholm-497344880-adisa-copy.jpg)

###

### FOLLOW US

  *     *       *         * 

World Travel Guide > Guides > Europe > Sweden > Stockholm

Stockholm Weather

19°C

Local time Stockholm

Currency

kr

#### Introducing Stockholm

  * About Stockholm
  * History
  * Weather / Best time to visit
  * Images of Stockholm

#### While you’re there

  * Getting around
  * Things to see
  * Tours & excursions
  * Things to do
  * Shopping
  * Restaurants
  * Nightlife
  * Events

#### Plan your trip

  * Travel to Stockholm
  * Hotels

#### Sweden Information

  * About Sweden
  * Passport & visa
  * Health
  * Public Holidays
  * Money & duty free
  * Food & drink

Browse our Video Guides

Book your flight

the IDs1543Stockholm Arlanda Airport

Places in Stockholm

#### Airports

  * Stockholm Arlanda Airport

# Shopping in Stockholm

There's an awful lot more to the Stockholm's retail scene than plastic Viking
helmets and ABBA knick-knacks. Shopping here is heavenly, thanks to the fact
that the profits of Sweden's post-war prosperity have spent decades pouring
into the city's boutiques and stores. The area around Biblioteksgatan has most
major European fashion designers, while antique shops can be found around
Odengatan.

### Key areas

For a more bohemian selection of clothing than you'd find downtown, as well as
quirky design, vintage items and curios, head for Sodermalm (particularly the
SoFo district), where you'll find one-off shops and boutiques selling cool and
creative items, as well as buzzing cafes, restaurants and hip galleries.

The pick of Swedish arts and crafts is at Konsthantverkarna, at Sodermalms
Torg 4. Norrgavel, Birger Jarlsgatan 27, has a great selection of cool home
furnishings. Nordiska Galleriet, Nybrogatan 11, excels in furniture design,
and Designtorget, Kungsgatan 52, in eclectic curiosities.

For those interested in combining novelty value with retail therapy,
meanwhile, the world's largest IKEA sits in Skarholmen, a short distance
southwest of Stockholm proper. Since opening this store in 1965, the Swedish
home furnishings giant has established a presence in 28 countries around the
world. There are further megastores and shopping malls in the vicinity.

### Markets

Open all day at Östermalmstorg, Östermalms Saluhall is one of nothern Europe's
loveliest covered food market. Also of interest to gourmet travellers is,
Glasshus, Birkagatan 8, which sells some 50 different kinds of exceedingly
good ice creams and sorbets, well worth a visit on a hot summer day.
Marsipanbaten, moored at Strandvagskajen 18, is the place to go if you're a
marzipan fan.

### Shopping centres

Stockholm's best, and oldest, department store is NK (Nordiska Kompaniet),
Hamngatan 18-20, which has over 100 departments, selling everything from
crafts to health food. Gallerian, Hamngatan 37, and Åhlens City,
Klarabergsgatan 50, also sell a bit of everything, from fashion to kitchen
appliances, with lower price tags. For trendy fashion and innovative clothing
and accessories, try PUB, Hotorget, where Greta Garbo once worked, or
Sturegallerian on Stureplan, also home to Stockholm's most renowned spa.

### Opening hours

Standard Swedish shopping hours are Monday to Friday 0900-1600 and Saturday
0900-1400. In Stockholm, however, many stores are open for longer and on
Sunday.

### Souvenirs

You'll find creative souvenir outlets selling everything from designer
textiles to one-off ceramics, so while you might end up having to spend a fair
bit, there's exceptional choice. Top tip: check out the city's numerous museum
shops, which stock high quality fabrics, books, jewellery and stationery.

### Tax information

Visitors leaving the country may reclaim the standard VAT tariff of 25% within
30 days of purchase - only available at shops displaying the 'tax free
shopping' sign and for purchases up to Kr15,000. The receipt and unopened
goods must be presented at the airport for a refund. Global Blue
(www.globalblue.com/customer-services/tax-free-shopping/refund-
points/sweden/stockholm-arlanda-terminal-52/) can provide further information.

## __Related Articles

![](https://www.worldtravelguide.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/shu-Europe-

Sweden-Stockholm-613199033-Andrey-Shcherbukhin-2500x1045.jpg)

#### City Highlight: Stockholm

Find a city-break escape in Stockholm: a spired skyline ensconced in an
archipelago with world-class museums, succulent meatballs and refined heritage

### About The World Travel Guide

The World Travel Guide (WTG) is the flagship digital consumer brand within the
Columbus Travel Media portfolio. A comprehensive guide to the world’s best
travel destinations, its print heritage stretches back 30 years, with the
online portal reaching its 15-year anniversary in 2014. Available in English,
German and Spanish versions, the WTG provides detailed and accurate travel
content designed to inspire global travellers. It covers all aspects, from
cities to airports, cruise ports to ski and beach resorts, attractions to
events, and it also includes weekly travel news, features and quizzes. Updated
every day by a dedicated global editorial team, the portal logs 1 million+
unique users monthly.

  * Africa
  * Asia
  * Caribbean
  * Europe
  * Middle East
  * North America
  * Oceania
  * South America

  * Airport guides

  * Beach Guides
  * City Guides
  * Country Guides
  * Cruise Guides
  * Passport & Visa
  * Public Holidays
  * Ski Resorts

  * About Us

  * Book Shop

  * Der Reiseführer

  * Guía Mundial de Viajes
  * Columbus Travel Pro
  * Advertiser T's and C's
  * Contributors T's & C's
  * Conditions for use
  * Conditions for Sales of Goods
  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookie Policy

![](https://www.worldtravelguide.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/CV-Montage-

Banner.jpg)

![travel_media_icon](https://www.worldtravelguide.net/wp-

content/uploads/2017/01/travel_media_icon.png)![travolution_icon](https://www.worldtravelguide.net/wp-

content/uploads/2017/01/travolution_icon.png)![british_travel_icon](https://www.worldtravelguide.net/wp-

content/uploads/2017/01/british_travel_icon.png)

  *     *       *         * 

© Columbus Travel Media Ltd. All rights reserved 2019

We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website.
If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with
it.OkNoCookie Policy

Revoke cookies

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

