

__Contact Us

__Insurance

__Admissions

__Teen Addiction

Search

![The Recovery Village](/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/NEW_TRV-logo-Loch.png)
![The Recovery Village](/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/apple-icon-152x152.png)

__

352.771.2700 Recovery Is Possible __

__

  * Drug Addiction __
    *       * Drug Addiction Overview
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Alcohol
    * Cocaine
    * Heroin
    * Marijuana
    * Meth
    * Xanax
    * Stimulants
    * Adderall
    * Amphetamines
    * Bath Salts
    * Crack
    * Ecstasy, MDMA
    * Spice, K2
    *       * Opioid/Opiates
    * Codeine
    * Fentanyl
    * OxyContin
    * Hydrocodone
    * Dilaudid
    * Lortab
    * Kratom
    * Morphine
    * Oxycodone
    * Vicodin
    * Benzodiazepines
    * Ativan
    * Klonopin
    * Valium
    * Librium
    *       * Prescription Drugs
    * Percocet
    * Methadone
    * Ambien
    * Tramadol
    * Suboxone
    * Subutex
    * Narcan
    * Ultram
    * Fioricet
    * Trazodone
    * Drug Index
      * Ayahuasca
      * CBD (Cannabidiol)
      * Kava
      * Peyote
    *       * ![Dealing With the Issues of a High-Functioning Alcoholic](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/psychological-vs-physical-addiction-social-150x150.jpg)

Dealing With the Issues of a High-Functioning Alcoholic

![Can you become addicted to Heroin the first

time?](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/addicted-

first-time-100x100.jpg)

Can You Become Addicted to Heroin the First Time?

* * *

__ Drug Abuse Hotline

__ Alcohol Hotline

* * *

**Need help? Call us today.** __352.771.2700

  * Mental Health __
    *       * Anxiety Disorders
      * Anxiety
      * Generalized Anxiety
      * Panic Disorder
      * Social Anxiety
    * Personality Disorders
      * Antisocial PD
      * Borderline PD
      * Dissociative Identity Disorder
      * Histrionic PD
      * Schizoid PD
    * Stress Related Disorders
      * Adjustment Disorder
      * PTSD
    *       * Eating Disorders
      * Anorexia
      * Binge Eating
      * Bulimia
      * Restrictive Food Intake
    * Depression & Mood Disorders
      * Bipolar Disorder
      * Depression
      * Major Depressive Disorder
      * Postpartum Depression
    * Obsessive Compulsive Disorders
      * Body Dysmorphia
      * Gender Dysphoria
      * Impulse Control Disorder
      * OCD
    *       * Other Mental Health Issues
      * ADHD/ADD
      * Phobias
      * Psychosis
      * Schizophrenia
      * Sleep Disorders
    * Common Co-Occurring Disorders
      * Process Addictions
      * Anxiety and Substance Abuse
      * Borderline PD and Drug Abuse
      * Depression and Drug Abuse
      * Panic Disorder and Drug Abuse
      * PTSD and Substance Abuse
      * Schizophrenia and Drug Abuse
    *       * ![comforting a woman experiencing a mental health crisis](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/What-is-mental-health-first-aid-150x150.jpg)

Mental Health First Aid

* * *

**Need help? Call us today.** __352.771.2700

  * Addiction Treatment __
    *       * Drug Addiction Treatment
      * Alcoholism Treatment
      * Medical Detox
      * Medication-Assisted Treatment
      * Inpatient Rehab
      * Partial Hospitalization
      * Intensive Outpatient
      * Outpatient Rehab
      * Aftercare
      * Dual Diagnosis
    *       * Understanding Treatment
      * Our Treatment Philosophy
      * Drug Rehab
      * Drug Detox
      * Intervention
      * Friends & Family Portal
    * Treatment Therapies
      * Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
      * Dialectical Behavioral Therapy
      * Individual/Group Therapy
      * Intensive Therapy
      * Substance Abuse Treatment Centers and Rehab
      * Substance Abuse Counseling
    *       * Mental Health/Dual Diagnosis
      * Treatments for Anxiety
      * Bipolar Treatments
      * Treatments for Schizophrenia
      * Depression Treatments
      * PTSD Treatments
    *       * ![10 Tips to Help Family Members of Addicts Cope](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/shutterstock_285296222-e1494436072654-150x150.jpg)

10 Tips to Help Family Members of Those Struggling With Addiction Cope

![](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/05/@istock_000013186202_large-600x400-150x150.jpg)

10 Signs You Need Professional Help

* * *

__ Heroin Hotline

__ Marijuana Hotline

* * *

**Need help? Call us today.** __352.771.2700

  * Our Rehab Centers __
    * Locations Overview
    *       * Nationwide Adult Rehab Centers
    * The Recovery Village Umatilla (FL)
    * Orlando Recovery Center (FL)
    * The Recovery Village at Palmer Lake (CO)
    * The Recovery Village Columbus (OH)
    * The Recovery Village Ridgefield (WA)
    *       * Specialty Rehab Centers
    * Next Generation Village (FL)
    * IAFF Recovery Center (MD)
    * Aftercare
    * Next Step Village (FL)
  * Treatment By State __
    *       * Alabama
    * Alaska
    * Arizona
    * Arkansas
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Connecticut
    * Delaware
    * Florida
    * Georgia
    * Hawaii
    * Idaho
    * Illinois
    *       * Indiana
    * Iowa
    * Kansas
    * Kentucky
    * Louisiana
    * Maine
    * Maryland
    * Massachusetts
    * Michigan
    * Minnesota
    * Mississippi
    * Missouri
    * Montana
    *       * Nebraska
    * Nevada
    * New Hampshire
    * New Jersey
    * New Mexico
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * North Dakota
    * Ohio
    * Oklahoma
    * Oregon
    * Pennsylvania
    *       * Rhode Island
    * South Carolina
    * South Dakota
    * Tennessee
    * Texas
    * Utah
    * Vermont
    * Virginia
    * Washington
    * West Virginia
    * Wisconsin
    * Wyoming
  * Resources __
    *       * Sobriety Calculator
    * Friends and Family
    * Teen Addiction
    * College Students
    * LGBTQ+ Addiction
    * Active Duty Military
    * Military Veterans
    *       * Fitness & Nutrition
    * Spiritual Resources
    * Domestic Violence
    * Lawyers
    * Caregiver Resources
    * Cancer Patients
    * Elderly
  * Recovery Blog __
    * Inside Addiction
  * __Insurance
  * __Contact Us
  * __Admissions
  *     * Search

__ **Don't wait another day. Help is a phone call away.** 352.771.2700

_close_ What To Expect

Seeking addiction treatment can feel overwhelming. We know the struggle, which
is why we're uniquely qualified to help.

**Your call is confidential,** and there's **no pressure to commit to
treatment** until you're ready. As a voluntary facility, we're here to help
you heal -- on your terms. Our sole focus is getting you back to the healthy,
sober life you deserve, and we are **ready and waiting to answer your
questions or concerns.**

__

352.771.2700

Recovery Is Possible

Home ____ Marijuana Addiction

__Share 403

__Tweet

__Share

403 Shares

# Marijuana Addiction

## Marijuana Addiction Hotline

24/7, Toll-Free, Confidential

__844-207-6576

While Marijuana may not be as life-threatening as heroin or cocaine is,
developing a marijuana addiction is possible and can have immensely negative
effects on the body and brain. Marijuana is one of the most popular drugs
available due to easy accessibility and the various methods of ingestion.
Forming an addiction to the drug can happen quite easily, even faster than
some people may realize is possible. However, managing an addiction to
marijuana, like any drug, is a perfectly obtainable goal to set.

Table of Contents __

  *     1. Is Marijuana Addictive?
  *     1. Marijuana (Pot) Addiction Risks
  *     1. Medical Marijuana Uses

Collapse table of contents __

Rising in popularity within the American counterculture of the 1960s and
1970s, marijuana is now the most commonly abused illicit substance in the
United States. The most common way the drug is used is when the dried leaves
from the bushy plant are rolled into cigarettes or cigars and smoked. The
result of smoking the cigarette or cigar is a relaxing, euphoric high that
alters the smoker’s senses, memory, perception of time and motor skills.
Commonly known as “weed,” “pot,” and “bud,” marijuana recently became legal in
parts of the United States, spurring continued political controversy around
the substance. While the legality of smoking medical marijuana is now common
across the United States, in Colorado, California and Washington, D.C.,
smoking marijuana is also recreationally permitted.

Marijuana comes from the cannabis sativa plant. and refers to the dried
leaves, stems, flowers and seeds from the green, leafy plant. People abuse
marijuana because it contains delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, also called THC, a
chemical that produces euphoria, among other effects.

The cannabis plant is a green, leafy bush with distinct, five or seven-point
leaves. In the marijuana counterculture, the image of the cannabis leaf is
very popular symbology.

Dried marijuana ranges in color from green to brown, and looks similar to
clumps of moss, and joints and blunts look very similar to hand-rolled
cigarettes and cigars. Edible marijuana (baked in cookies, brownies, etc.)
look virtually identical to regular versions of the food. For example, pot
brownies look exactly the same as regular brownies, except their smell and
taste differ.

Dabs, which is a common street name for marijuana, can vary depending on the
kind of extract it inhibits. The liquid form is often called hash oil or honey
oil and looks similar to other kinds of oils. Wax is a soft solid, similar to
lip balm, and shatter is amber-colored solid. Oils are normally sold in small
bottles, while wax or shatter are sometimes sold in the shape of small
animals.

Much of the marijuana in the United States is grown locally, which is one
factor that contributes to marijuana addiction. But when imported into the
United States, from another country, marijuana typically comes from Mexico,
Canada, Colombia, Jamaica, Thailand, Nigeria, South Africa and Kazakhstan.
Imported marijuana typically comes in bricks, but individuals buying the drug
on the street typically buy nickel or dime bags.

Marijuana has many nicknames, which abusers and dealers often use to avoid
unwanted attention from police. Some street names for marijuana include:

  * Mary Jane
  * Weed
  * Pot
  * Kush
  * Herb
  * Bud
  * Grass
  * Ganja
  * Hash oil
  * Wax
  * Budder
  * Shatter
  * Dabs

Other terms related to marijuana and its abuse include:

  * **Joint:** A marijuana cigarette
  * **Doobie:** A nickname for a joint
  * **Blunt:** A marijuana cigar
  * **Roach:** The butt of a joint or blunt
  * **Roach clip** : A small metal clip used to hold the end of a joint or blunt so the user can smoke the entire thing without burning their hands
  * **Bowl:** A glass pipe for smoking marijuana
  * **Bong:** A water pipe for smoking marijuana
  * **Head shop** : A store that sells marijuana paraphernalia like bongs
  * **Dime bag** : A $10 bag of marijuana
  * **Nickel bag** : A $5 bag of marijuana
  * **Dabbing:** The act of smoking THC resin
  * **420** : Slang for smoking marijuana
  * **4/20** : April 20th, a notorious date for smoking marijuana to get high
  * **K2 or Spice** : Synthetic marijuana
  * **Brick:** A large, compacted block of marijuana

Marijuana users frequently combine the drug with other substances, especially
in a party atmosphere. Some of these combinations can be dangerous, though,
and cause risky interactions. Some common marijuana drug interactions include:

  * **Marijuana and anticoagulants, antiplatelet or anti-inflammatory drugs:** Combining marijuana with these types of drugs, including brand-names like Coumadin, Plavix, Motrin, Advil and Aleve, may increase a person’s risk of excessive bleeding. This can be especially dangerous as marijuana causes impaired motor skills and a person is more likely to hurt themselves while on the drug, which can lead to uncontrollable bleeding.
  * **Marijuana and diabetes drugs or insulin:** Marijuana possibly affects blood sugar levels. This is particularly risky for diabetics taking oral medications or insulin, as hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia can be fatal. If a person has an insulin prescription and a medical marijuana prescription, they should take these drugs under the close supervision of their doctor so they may monitor blood sugar levels and adjust doses accordingly.

**Marijuana and benzodiazepines, opioids and alcohol:** Combining these drugs
with marijuana can result in extreme drowsiness. It’s important for those
using marijuana and alcohol, Ativan, Valium, codeine, phenobarbital and other
similar drugs to avoid operating heavy machinery or vehicles. In these
circumstances, extreme drowsiness can cause dangerous situations.

## Is Marijuana Addictive? __

Whether or not marijuana is an addictive drug is a controversial topic in the
addiction research and healthcare communities. Scientific research shows that
roughly 30 percent of people who use marijuana develop an addiction to it. The
likelihood of developing a marijuana addiction increases by seven if the
person began using the drug as an adolescent.

The mind-altering substance in marijuana is delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, also
known as THC. When a person smokes pot, THC passes from the lungs into the
bloodstream, where it travels to the brain. The absorption process is a slow
one compared to other drugs, and it often takes 30 minutes to one hour before
one can feel high. The marijuana high takes effect faster if a person ingests
the drug rather than smokes it.

Marijuana activates certain receptors in the brain, causing symptoms such as
mood changes, impaired movement and memory, difficulty thinking, and an
altered sense of time and sight.

Those who smoke or ingest marijuana may build up a tolerance to it over time,
meaning they need to use more to experience the same effects. If continued,
this can lead to marijuana addiction and dependence, which is a state where a
person’s brain adjusts to having THC. When the chemical is removed (i.e..,
someone stops smoking), the body experiences withdrawal. Marijuana addiction
occurs when the body is physically dependent on marijuana and craves the drug.
In this case, a person may feel as though they need marijuana to survive and
will continue using the drug despite experiencing negative effects.

![marijuana](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/03/shutterstock_301537862-e1490810145423.jpg)

## Marijuana (Pot) Addiction Risks __

There is a common misconception that misusing marijuana has no negative
physical effects, like smoking cigarettes has. There are a handful of risks
that someone who is addicted to marijuana will face compared to the average
cigarette smoker. Just because marijuana addiction isn’t as frequent as other
addictions, this does not mean that the risks are not as dangerous. There are
a number of consequences that are associated with marijuana addiction,
including:

  * Risk of lung cancer
  * Decreased energy
  * Increased heart rate
  * Anxiety and depression
  * Mental impairment
  * Increased risk of heart attack

Another potential danger associated with marijuana addiction involves the
withdrawal symptoms, which usually peak a few days after the smoking ceases.
Withdrawal symptoms can include depression, excessive sweating, low appetite
and anxiety to name a few. If the use of marijuana is stopped abruptly, these
symptoms can come on strong and fast. The good news is that managing an
addiction to marijuana is achievable with the right support, tools and
resources.

Speak to an Intake Coordinator now.

__352.771.2700 __What to expect when I call?

Seeking addiction treatment can feel overwhelming. We know the struggle, which
is why we're uniquely qualified to help.

**Your call is confidential,** and there's **no pressure to commit** to
treatment until you're ready. As a voluntary facility, we're here to help you
heal -- on your terms. Our sole focus is getting you back to the healthy,
sober life you deserve, and **we are ready and waiting to answer your
questions or concerns 24/7.**

Speak to an Intake Coordinator now. __352.771.2700

## Medical Marijuana Uses __

While marijuana is a commonly-abused illicit drug, in recent years there has
also been a significant debate in the United States about marijuana’s medical
value. Between 1996 and 2017, 28 states and three territories passed
comprehensive medical marijuana and cannabis programs. In those areas, doctors
may prescribe marijuana for patients who many benefit from its use. While the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration has yet to approve medical marijuana as an
official medicine, there are a few pill cannabinoids the agency has approved.
Marijuana contains about 100 cannabinoids (which are the chemicals related to
THC) that create powerful effects. According to a study by The Institute of
Medicine, potential therapeutic benefits of THC and cannabinoid drugs include:

  * Pain Relief
  * Control of Nausea
  * Appetite Stimulation

The study notes there may also be medicinal benefits to smoking marijuana,
such as sedation, anxiety reduction and euphoria. However, these same effects
might be undesirable for other patients.

Most state laws that allow medical marijuana have very specific conditions
under which a doctor may prescribe patients the drug. While the conditions for
obtaining a marijuana card vary from state to state, many conditions overlap.
Having a card is also important because police may still pull drivers over and
penalize them for carrying the substance if they don’t have a patient ID or
registration card. Some of the common illnesses doctors prescribe medical
marijuana for are:

  * HIV and AIDS
  * Cancer
  * Glaucoma
  * Lou Gehrig’s Disease
  * Fibromyalgia
  * Parkinson’s Disease
  * Multiple Sclerosis
  * Epilepsy
  * Cachexia

The U.S. states where medical marijuana is allowed include:

  * Alaska
  * Arizona
  * Arkansas 
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Connecticut
  * Delaware
  * Florida 
  * Guam
  * Hawaii
  * Illinois
  * Maine
  * Maryland
  * Massachusetts
  * Michigan
  * Minnesota
  * Montana
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New Jersey
  * New Mexico
  * New York
  * North Dakota (pending)
  * Ohio
  * Oregon
  * Pennsylvania
  * Puerto Rico
  * Rhode Island
  * Vermont
  * Washington
  * Washington, D.C.

Some of these areas also allow patients from other states to travel there to
receive medical marijuana. Those states are Alaska, Arizona, Delaware, Maine,
Michigan, Nevada, New Hampshire and Rhode Island. In addition to allowing the
sale and use of medical marijuana, a few of these states also allow
recreational use of the drug. These states are Alaska, California, Colorado,
District of Columbia, Maine, Massachusetts, Nevada, Oregon and Washington.

For more information on how you or a loved one can begin on the road to a
marijuana-free life, call The Recovery Village. With an abundance of rehab
centers located nationwide, our treatment teams can help you gain the skills
needed to live your life without relying on any sort of substance. Our
representatives are eager to answer any questions you may have about addiction
treatment and recovery. Each call is free and confidential. Start your journey
to sobriety today.

![marijuana smoke](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/03/shutterstock_592173896-e1490810228171.jpg)

Sources

Drug Enforcement Administration. "Cannabis Production & Distribution." DEA
Museum & Visitors Center | Home, www.deamuseum.org/ccp/cannabis/production-
distribution.html. Accessed 22 Mar. 2017.

Foundation for a Drug-Free World. "Marijuana Street Names." Foundation for a
Drug-Free World,
www.drugfreeworld.org/drugfacts/marijuana/edibles.html#streetnames. Accessed
22 Mar. 2017.

Mayo Clinic. "Marijuana (Cannabis Sativa) Interactions." Mayo Clinic, 1 Nov.
2013, www.mayoclinic.org/drugs-
supplements/marijuana/interactions/hrb-20059701. Accessed 22 Mar. 2017.

National Institute on Drug Abuse. "DrugFacts: Marijuana As Medicine." National
Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), Mar. 2017,
www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana-medicine. Accessed 22 Mar.
2017.

"DrugFacts: What is Marijuana?" National Institute on Drug Abuse, Feb. 2017,
www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/marijuana. Accessed 22 Mar. 2017.

"What is the Scope of Marijuana Use in the United States?" National Institute
on Drug Abuse, Jan. 2017, www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-
reports/marijuana/what-scope-marijuana-use-in-united-states. Accessed 22 Mar.
2017.

Rahn, Bailey. "Qualifying Conditions for Medical Marijuana by State." Leafly,
www.leafly.com/news/health/qualifying-conditions-for-medical-marijuana-by-
state. Accessed 22 Mar. 2017.

Smith, Austin. "4 Marijuana Stats That Will Blow You Away." USA TODAY, 17 May
2016, www.usatoday.com/story/sponsor-story/motley-fool/2016/05/17/motley-fool-
marijuana-stats/84326712/. Accessed 22 Mar. 2017.

"State Medical Marijuana Laws." National Conference of State Legislatures, 16
Mar. 2017, www.ncsl.org/research/health/state-medical-marijuana-laws.aspx.
Accessed 22 Mar. 2017.

The Weed Blog. "List of Marijuana Slang Terms." The Weed Blog, 29 Apr. 2011,
www.theweedblog.com/marijuana-slang-terms/. Accessed 22 Mar. 2017.

NEXT:Signs, Symptoms & Side Effects

__

Marijuana Addiction

NEXT:Signs, Symptoms & Side Effects

__

Withdrawal& Detox

Marijuana Addiction Treatment & Rehab

##### Have more questions about Marijuana abuse?

Q.

How Long Does Marijuana Stay In Your System?

Q.

Is Marijuana Addictive?

Q.

How Do I Know If Someone Is On Marijuana?

Q.

How Long Does Marijuana Stay in Your System?

Q.

Is Marijuana a Gateway Drug?

Read the most frequently asked questions

##### See also

Marijuana Edibles: 3 Dangers of Use and Abuse

Marijuana Abuse Hotline

Can You Overdose on Marijuana?

Does Marijuana Cause Schizophrenia?

Marijuana and Zoloft Interactions

See more topics

### Is Roid Rage Real?

May 17, 2019

Search

Speak to an Intake Coordinator now.

__352.771.2700 __What to expect when I call?

Seeking addiction treatment can feel overwhelming. We know the struggle, which
is why we're uniquely qualified to help.

**Your call is confidential,** and there's **no pressure to commit** to
treatment until you're ready. As a voluntary facility, we're here to help you
heal -- on your terms. Our sole focus is getting you back to the healthy,
sober life you deserve, and **we are ready and waiting to answer your
questions or concerns 24/7.**

Speak to an Intake Coordinator now. __352.771.2700

## Learn More About Marijuana

Marijuana Addiction

5 (100%) 3 vote[s]

__Share 403

__Tweet

__Share

403 Shares

## Latest Related Posts:

  * Marijuana Edibles: 3 Dangers of Use and Abuse
  * What Are the Many Forms of Cannabis?
  * Marijuana Addiction Treatment & Rehab
  * Marijuana Hotline
  * Marijuana Abuse: Signs, Symptoms & Side Effects
  * Marijuana Withdrawal & Detox
  * Marijuana Addiction Related Topics
  * Marijuana Addiction FAQ

## Ready to start? We're here for you.

__352.771.2700

![The Recovery Village Drug Rehab Center](/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/NEW_TRV-

logo-Loch.png)

![The Recovery Village](https://www.therecoveryvillage.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/The-Recovery-Village.jpg) The Recovery Village

633 Umatilla Blvd. Umatilla, FL 32784

(352) 771-2700

### About Us

  * About
  * Our Team
  * Philosophy
  * Careers

### Get Started

  * Admissions
  * Insurance
  * Locations
  * Contact Us

### Legal

  * Notice Of Privacy Practices
  * Terms and Conditions
  * Privacy Policy

* * *

(C) The Recovery Village at Umatilla All Rights Reserved.

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

