

  * Home
  * My Account
  * Login
  * Newsletter
  * News
  * Community News
  * Forum
  * Sports
  * Features
  * Arts
  * Business
  * Obituaries
  * Gallery
  * Classifieds
  * Open Houses
  * Events Calendar
  * Help/FAQ
  * Print Edition
  * Contact Us

![](/files/2017/11/enterprise.png)

YOLO COUNTY NEWS

###

# E-cigarettes are a gateway drug

By Special to The Enterprise

By Donald Bucklin

About a year ago, I was surprised to find out from my daughter that Hookah
Pens were all the rage among the high school crowd.

If you are, like I was, among the uninitiated, this is a device of roughly
cigarette proportions that contains a battery, a tiny vaporizer, something to
vaporize and a button to make it go.

Most commonly that “something” is propylene glycol and nicotine. Press a
button and you can inhale a smoke-like vapor that contains nicotine or a few
other drugs for the more adventuresome.

Since nothing is burning, you are not technically smoking, and the smoke-free
laws are therefore neatly sidestepped. Yet all the while people are getting a
very smoking-like experience. Clever little device, huh?

E-cigarettes/Hookah Pens are kind of a half-full/half-empty sort of thing. The
industry likes to take the high road. They want you to believe that if you are
a two- or three-pack-a-day smoker, and you switch to e-cigarettes as a
substitution, you are better off.

And why wouldn’t you be? There’s no tar, no carbon monoxide and no 400-plus
chemicals released from burning tobacco. You won’t burn the house down, and
there is only one thing to worry about — nicotine! That’s a pretty impressive
list of positives.

The e-cigarette competes for these presumably soon-to-be ex-smokers with
nicotine gum, patches, Chantix, antidepressants, hypnotism, willpower and
tracheostomy.

There is no great evidence that these devices are an effective way to quit.
But they might be. This doesn't seem like a growing customer base on which to
start an industry, since fewer and fewer people are smoking.

To figure out what the e-cigarette industry is actually betting on, we need
look no further than the Centers for Disease Control’s 2012 National Youth
Tobacco Survey. A few of our tax dollars keep track of smoking rates in young
people. That seems prudent, given the negative health consequences of smoking.

Overall, looking at students in grades 6-12, e-cigarette use more than doubled
between 2011 and 2012, going from 3.3 percent who tried it to 6.8 percent. Of
the 2.1 percent who were currently e-cigarette users, 75 percent also smoked
non e-cigarettes — aka “regular” cigarettes with their 400-plus chemicals that
require a match.

Small percentages doubling in a year’s time doesn’t sound like much, but there
are a lot of kids in school — about 15 million in high school alone. A little
math works out to more than 1 million high school students who are or have
become e-cigarette customers, most of whom also smoke regular cigarettes.

If the trend continues with Hookah Pens, next year there will be 2 million,
and before long, a new generation of smokers. Does the expression “gateway
drug” come to mind?

Are Hookah Pens the latest version of Joe Camel? Are they wrapped in purple
paper and sold at “head shops” to attract adult smokers or teens?

Interestingly, when one of the largest university systems in the world — the
University of California — decided to ban smoking on all its campuses
effective Jan. 1, it included e-cigarettes in the ban. The California State
University system is considering a similar ban.

We have made great progress in the past two decades to reduce smoking. In many
areas, smoking is so rare that it’s actually startling to see someone lighting
one up.

Let’s not fool ourselves that these cute “personal vaporizers” are out there
to get 60-year-old smokers to quit. The real purpose is getting 16-year-olds
to start.

_— Donald Bucklin, M.D., is a regional medical director for U.S. HealthWorks
and has been practicing clinical occupational medicine for more than 25
years._

### _Related_

ShareTweet

Tags: B4, PRINTED

Printed in the December 19, 2013 edition on page B4 | Published on December
18, 2013 | Last Modified on December 18, 2013 at 10:36 am

Subscribe to our free Morning Edition newsletter

Search

  * ## Recent Posts

  * Plane crashes south of Davis

  * Bob Dunning: Hitting all the right notes
  * Davis High names Athletes of the Year
  * Need a new best friend?
  * Pets of the week
  * Sports roundup: Clancy finishes 18th at NCAA Championship
  * Kim Orendor: Remembering my first World Cup
  * Davis High School seniors recognized with scholarships, awards during Tuesday ceremony
  * Three, two, one — back up!
  * Explorit: Fabulous fathers in nature

  * ## Follow Us On Facebook

> Follow Us On Facebook

### Special Publications

  * ![](https://www.davisenterprise.com/files/2019/05/RER1-4.jpg)
  * ![](https://www.davisenterprise.com/files/2019/05/SL1.jpg)
  * ![](https://www.davisenterprise.com/files/2019/05/LCR1-1.jpg)

### Quick Links

  * My Account
  * Customer Service
  * Davis Open Houses
  * Events Calendar
  * Facebook Page
  * Twitter Feed
  * Newsroom Internships
  * Submit An Obituary
  * Print Edition

  * Real Estate Review Friday, May 31, 2019

  * Senior Life 2019
  * Last Chance Rental Guide 2019
  * Ask the Expert: Every service under the sun and slab
  * Ask the Expert 2019
  * Readers' Choice 2019
  * Design-an-Ad 2019
  * Yolo Magazine Winter/Spring 2019
  * Yolo Magazine Summer/Fall 2018
  * Breast Cancer Awareness 2018
  * Welcome to Davis: On the Go 2018
  * Welcome to Davis: On Campus 2018
  * Welcome to Davis: Our Community 2018
  * Welcome to Davis: Only in Davis 2018

Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Service (updated
4/30/2015) and Privacy Policy (updated 4/7/2015).  
Copyright (c) 2019 McNaughton Newspapers, Inc., a family-owned local media
company that proudly publishes the Daily Republic, Mountain Democrat, Davis
Enterprise, Village Life, Winters Express, Georgetown Gazette, EDC Adventures,
and other community-driven publications.

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-71sIyu7uMEjlU.gif)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

