

  * News in Brief

  * Economics

  * Education

  * Environment

  * Social Justice

  * Features & Investigations

  * Ideas

  * Audio

  * Newsletter

  * _About_

  * _Impact_
  * _Contact_
  * _Pitching_
  * _Careers_
  * _Partnerships_
  * _Terms of Use_
  * _Email Newsletter_
  * _Platform Privacy_
  * _Privacy Settings_

  *     *       *         *   * ![Logo](https://psmag.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTQ2MTgzMzA3OTc1OTkyODY0/navbar.png)

  * News in Brief
  * Economics
  * Education
  * Environment
  * Social Justice
  * Features & Investigations
  * Ideas
  * Audio
  * Newsletter

  *     *       *         *   * Log In

![](https://psmag.com/.image/c_fit%2Ccs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_700/MTQ2NzYyMDc3MDk5MjcxOTc5/large.png)

  * ![Logo](https://psmag.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTQ2MTgzMzA3OTc1OTkyODY0/navbar.png)
  * News in Brief
  * Economics
  * Education
  * Environment
  * Social Justice
  * Features & Investigations
  * Ideas
  * Audio
  * Newsletter

  * Home

  * News in Brief

  * According to Research

  * Expert Reactions
  * Footnotes
  * Key Takeaways
  * The (Short) PS Interview
  * The Week in Photos
  * Viewfinder
  * You Might Have Missed

# Legal Pot Is Linked to Less Crime

A new study suggests it also decreases other types of drug use, including
binge drinking.

Author:

    
    
    Tom Jacobs
    

Publish date:

    
    
    Apr 9, 2018
    

Updated on

    
    
    Apr 6, 2018
    

  *     *       *         * 

![Marijuana on display at a dispensary in Los Angeles,

California.](https://psmag.com/.image/t_share/MTU0NzE1MzAwNTA2Mzc5NzE4/gettyimages-91997107.jpg)

Marijuana on display at a dispensary in Los Angeles, California.

(Photo: David McNew/Getty Images)

Drugs and crime: The two phenomena have been linked for so long that many
assume one inevitably leads to the other. Attorney General Jeff Sessions
insists legalizing marijuana can inspire violent activity, while some in
Colorado have linked legal pot to that state's increase in crime.

Fear-mongering? New research suggests as much. It provides evidence that
legalizing cannabis in the state of Washington led to a significant _decrease_
in criminal activity.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

America is debating "the costs and benefits of a legal drug market," writes a
University of Bologna research team led by economist Davide Dragone. "An
increase in crime does not appear to be a plausible cost."

The study, published in the _Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization_
_,_ takes advantage of a two-year window (2013 and 2014) when recreational
marijuana was legal in Washington, but illegal in the adjacent state of
Oregon.

The researchers focused on counties on either side of the state border--10 in
Oregon, and 11 in Washington--comparing crime statistics and data on alcohol
and drug consumption.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

They report legalizing pot "caused a significant reduction in rapes and
property crimes on the Washington side of the border in 2013-14, relative to
the Oregon side, and relative to the pre-legalization years 2010-12."

These drops were quite sizable: "It reduced rapes by between 15 and 30 percent
(between two and four occurrences per 100,000 inhabitants), and thefts by
between 10 and 20 percent (between 60 and 100 per 100,000 inhabitants."

Not surprisingly, the researchers report consumption of pot increased after
smoking it became lawful. But the change in the law apparently decreased use
of other drugs, and specifically reduced binge drinking.

The results echo those of another study released in January, which found the
rate of violent crime fell in counties close to the United States-Mexico
border after marijuana was legalized for medical purposes.

These latest findings offer no evidence as to why the change in law is having
a positive effect, but the study's authors offer four possible explanations.

First, and most obviously, they note that, for most users, pot produces "a
state of relaxation and euphoria," which presumably "reduces the likelihood of
engaging in violent activities." (Unless you count brutally ripping open
potato-chip bags during a bad case of the munchies.)

"Second, this effect is reinforced if cannabis is a substitute for violence-
inducing substances such as alcohol, cocaine and amphetamines," they write--a
dynamic confirmed by their data.

"Third, the legalization of recreational marijuana may induce a reallocation
of police efforts away from cannabis pushers and consumers, and towards other
types of offenses," they note. And finally, it "may have reduced the role of
criminal gangs and small criminals in local cannabis markets."

The researchers call this "first-pass evidence" of a link between legal pot
and lower crime rates; more studies are needed. But at the very least, it
suggests that, if they intend to slow this trend, anti-pot crusaders will need
to come up with better scare tactics.

It's doubtful the frightening specter of higher home prices will cut it.

Tags

terms:

    
    
    WashingtonMarijuana LegalizationDrugsCrimeMarijuanaquick studies
    

![Tom

Jacobs](https://psmag.com/.image/c_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cg_face%2Ch_60%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_60/MTQ2OTc5MTkzODcwMDk5NTUx/tom-

jacobs.jpg)

By

Tom Jacobs

Tom Jacobs is a senior staff writer at Pacific Standard, where he specializes
in social science, culture, and learning. He is a veteran journalist and
former staff writer for the _Los Angeles Daily News_ and the _Santa Barbara
News-Press_.

  *     *       *         * 

#

![Related](https://psmag.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTUzMDcyMjkxMTAwNTAwOTk5/section_header_art_xtrasmall_related.svg)

![Leadville,

Colorado.](https://psmag.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTUzODU3NjQ4MTUwNzE4MjA2/3913127383_89d52d7dfd_o.jpg)

Economics

## In Colorado, Legal Pot Increases Housing Values

Homeowners are getting high, and so is the value of their residences.

![GettyImages-91997114](https://psmag.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTQ4NjE3ODcyODc1MjAxNTkx/gettyimages-91997114.jpg)

Economics

## Closing Pot Dispensaries Increases Neighborhood Crime

Medical marijuana outlets increase street traffic, which deters potential
criminals.

![GettyImages-75298973](https://psmag.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTUyMDk3MzA3NDg2MDcwNjY2/gettyimages-75298973.jpg)

News in Brief

## Social Media Use Is Linked to a Fear of Crime

New research raises the possibility that the more time we spend on Facebook
and Twitter, the less safe we feel.

Social Justice

## College Costs Linked to Risky Teen Behavior

New research links the cost of community college tuition rates with drinking
and drug use by teenagers.

News in Brief

## Legalizing Pot: Will It End the Mexican Drug Cartels?

If pot were legal — not decriminalized, but legal — it likely would knock a
few props from beneath rampaging Mexican drugs cartels, argues Michael Scott
Moore.

Social Justice

## What Happens When Penalties for Pot Smoking Are Reduced?

At least, that has been the experience in Great Britain, according to a new
analysis.

# ![Subscribe to our

Newsletter](https://psmag.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTUzMDcyMTY1NzQxMTQzMDQ3/section_header_art_xtrasmall_subscribe.svg)

Subscribe

  * About
  * Impact
  * Contact
  * Pitching
  * Careers
  * Partnerships
  * Terms of Use
  * Email Newsletter
  * Platform Privacy

(C) 2019 The Social Justice Foundation

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

