

  * __
  * Sections __
  * __
  * Home

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

  * Try 1 month for $1
  * Username
  * Sign In

* * *
    
    
    * My Post __
    * My Reading List __
    * Account Settings __
    * Newsletters & alerts __
    * Gift subscriptions __
    * Contact us __
    * Help desk __
    

  * My Post __
  * My Reading List __
  * Account Settings __
  * Newsletters & alerts __
  * Gift subscriptions __
  * Contact us __
  * Help desk __

  * Accessibility for screenreader

Economic Policy Analysis

__

**Analysis** Interpretation of the news based on evidence, including data, as
well as anticipating how events might unfold based on past events

# Following marijuana legalization, teen drug use is down in Colorado

Add to list

In my list

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

By Christopher Ingraham

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Christopher Ingraham

Reporter covering all things data

Email **Bio __Follow**

December 11, 2017

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/XlECiCXpB3oMpNOFxnZdlnOBTxk=/480x0/arc-

anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/ZRHP35YIGY3J7OKWKO2RDQA6NQ.png)

Following legalization, the rate of adolescent marijuana use in Colorado has
fallen to its lowest level in nearly a decade, according to new federal survey
data.

State-level numbers from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health show that
a little more than 9 percent of Colorado teens age 12 to 17 used marijuana
monthly in 2015 and 2016, a statistically significant drop from the prior
period. That's the lowest rate of monthly marijuana use in the state since
2007 and 2008.

And it's not just marijuana: Rates of teen alcohol, tobacco and heroin use are
down sharply in the state, as well.

Colorado, which was the first in the nation to open recreational marijuana
markets in 2014, is viewed as a bellwether by both opponents and supporters of
legalization.

For state-level data, the survey uses pooled two-year periods to increase
sample sizes and statistical accuracy. Last year the survey showed that
Colorado was ranked No. 1 in the nation on adolescent marijuana use, a fact
seized by marijuana opponents to argue that legalization was failing to
protect children from drug use.

With the sharp drop in this year's data, Colorado has fallen to No. 7 in the
national ranking of teen marijuana use, behind Alaska, Maine, New Mexico,
Oregon, Rhode Island and Vermont. A separate survey administered by officials
in Colorado has found that teens in the state are in the middle of the pack on
marijuana use.

“Teen use appears to be dropping now that state and local authorities are
overseeing the production and sale of marijuana,” said Brian Vicente of
Vicente Sederberg LLC, one of the drafters of Colorado's marijuana ballot
measure, in a statement. “There are serious penalties for selling to minors,
and regulated cannabis businesses are being vigilant in checking IDs.”

Attorney General Jeff Sessions is an outspoken critic of marijuana
legalization, but thus far he has hewed to the prior administration's policy
of noninterference with state-level legalization efforts. While marijuana
remains illegal at the federal level, voters in eight states plus the District
have legalized the recreational use of the drug. Lawmakers in Vermont have
signaled they will legalize the recreational use of marijuana early next year.

The new federal data shows that adolescent marijuana use fell nationwide in
2016. In no states did the share of teens using pot increase by a significant
amount, and in a number, including California, Colorado, Maryland, New Jersey
and Texas, rates of teen marijuana use fell considerably.

Use is up, however, among young adults age 18 to 25 and adults age 26 and up.
Alcohol use, meanwhile, is falling across the board, according to the federal
survey data.

In Colorado, for instance, the number of 18-to-25-year-olds using alcohol on a
monthly basis fell by four percentage points between 2014-2015 and 2015-2016.
That's the group with the highest propensity to use marijuana, suggesting that
a number of young adults are opting to smoke weed instead of get drunk now
that the option is available to them.

If that's the case, it could be a big public-health win, considering what
public-health experts know about the harmfulness of marijuana vis-à-vis booze.

Comments

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Christopher Ingraham Christopher Ingraham writes about all things data. He
previously worked at the Brookings Institution and the Pew Research Center.
Follow __

Market Watch

Dow 25,720.66

Today 0.71%

S&P 2,843.49

Today 0.61%

NASDAQ 7,615.55

Today 0.53%

Last Updated:06/06/2019

![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

Subscriber sign in

### We noticed you’re blocking ads!

Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a
subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

Try 1 month for $1

Unblock ads

Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

