

![Leaf Science](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/leafscience_logo_mobile.png)

  * Home
  * Health A-Z
  * Extracts
  * Edibles
  * Vaporizers
  * Strains
  * Resources

__

    
    
    * Cannabinoids
    

  * Hemp Oil

__

    
    
    * About
    * Benefits
    * Experience
    * Law
    * News
    * Studies
    

  * About
  * Contact
  * Write
  * Privacy
  * Terms

__

Facebook

__

Twitter

![Leaf Science](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/leafscience_logo.png)

Now Reading

###### Can You Overdose on Marijuana?

0 Comments

__ 0

__

__ 1

__

![Leaf Science](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/leafscience_logo.png)

  * 0

![Leaf Science](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/leafscience_logo.png)

  * Home
  * Health A-Z
  * Extracts
  * Edibles
  * Vaporizers
  * Strains
  * Resources
    * Cannabinoids
  * Hemp Oil

    * About
    * Benefits
    * Experience
    * Law
    * News
    * Studies
  * Follow

    * __

Facebook

22.5K

__

Twitter

4.2K

    
    
    * #### Sign Up to Our Newsletter
    

Get notified about exclusive offers every week!

SIGN UP

I would like to receive news and special offers.

  * Now Week Month

![](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/https-blogs-

images.forbes.com-margauxlushing-files-2019-03-Shanti-1200x960-20x20.jpg)

##### The Benefits of CBD Oil For Anxiety

![Love Drug: How Cannabis can enhance your sex

life](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Sex-beyond-

midlife-older-couple-20x20.jpg)

##### Love Drug: How Cannabis can enhance your sex life

![Eating edibles safety tips](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/edibles.jpg)

##### Before You Try Edibles: Read This

![Woman's health and Cannabis](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/02/How-Cannabis-can-Help-you-Through-Your-Period.jpg)

##### How Cannabis can Help you Through Your Period

![Jack Herer -](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Jack-

Herer-The-Emperor-of-Hemp-e1553037294309-20x20.jpg)

##### People who Changed Pot Forever

  * 0

Health

# Can You Overdose on Marijuana?

October 17, 2017

![Photo of marijuana smoke that someone could overdose

on.](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/e99254a47c10551d0a5b396fcbcea7c1?s=156&d=mm&r=g)

Leaf Science Editorial Team

1 Shares

__ 0

__

__ 1

__

###### Read Next

![Marinol package](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/Marinol1.jpg)

##### What is Marinol (Dronabinol)?

#### Marijuana overdoses do not cause death, unlike alcohol and many other

drugs.

While prescription painkillers cause thousands of overdose deaths each year,
no one has ever died from a marijuana overdose.

In fact, studies suggest it is impossible to die from smoking too much
marijuana. But indirect deaths are possible -- and documented.

Of course, what some people mean when they say “overdose” is simply taking too
much of a drug. When using this definition, it’s certainly possible to
overdose on marijuana, which can lead to unpleasant symptoms like anxiety,
dizziness, and vomiting.

Let's take a look at what science says about overdosing on marijuana.

## Can You Die From a Marijuana Overdose?

![Can You Die From a Marijuana

Overdose?](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)(Photo:
Shutterstock)

The short answer is no. According to the National Cancer Institute, you cannot
die of a marijuana overdose. Here's why:

> "Because cannabinoid receptors, unlike opioid receptors, are not located in
the brainstem areas controlling respiration, lethal overdoses from Cannabis
and cannabinoids do not occur."

In other words, marijuana and opioids affect different pathways of the body.
Opioid pathways, also known as receptors, are present in areas of the brain
that control breathing. As a result, taking too many painkillers can cause a
person to stop breathing.

But marijuana acts on a completely different set of pathways. These pathways
are called cannabinoid receptors and they do not affect respiration. Thus,
marijuana cannot cause someone to stop breathing, no matter how much they
ingest.

While it’s essentially impossible to consume enough THC to kill you, you may
be able to die as an indirect consequence of taking marijuana. So the long
answer is possibly, indirectly.

There have only been a small number of reported cases of THC-induced deaths,
and none was directly caused by overdose.

In a 2014 incident, an inexperienced user overdosed on an edible marijuana
product. He became agitated and confused, and jumped to his death from a
balcony. This was an indirect effect of severe intoxication, but it wasn’t
death by THC overdose.

In another case, a person passed out and hit their head after doing a dab -- a
strong hit of cannabis concentrates.

Dabs are potent cannabis extracts that have especially high concentrations of
THC. While dried marijuana typically contains 10-20% THC, dabs contain 70-90%
THC.

Dabbing delivers a super strong hit of THC, and it’s known for getting even
seasoned smokers high. That being said, concentrates are just THC and you
cannot overdose on THC.

## What Is The Lethal Dose of Marijuana?

![What Is The Lethal Dose of

Marijuana?](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)(Photo:
Shutterstock)

The lethal dose of marijuana is thought to be extremely high. While lethal
doses have not been observed in humans, they can be estimated by injecting
rats with large doses of THC.

Scientists use a measure called the LD50 (lethal dose) to describe the dose of
a drug that would kill 50% of a given population. Another measure called the
ED50 (effective dose) refers to the dose of a drug that works for 50% of the
population.

In general, the closer the LD50 and the ED50 are, the more dangerous the drug
is.

For example, the LD50 for alcohol is 10 drinks (a drink meaning 1 shot, beer,
or glass of wine) all at once. Compared to the effective dose, which is simply
1 drink, it’s easy to see why alcohol poisoning is so common. And when it
comes to heroin, the lethal dose is only 5 times the effective dose.

The lethal dose for marijuana is estimated to be 40,000 times the effective
dose. In other words, someone would have to take 40,000 times the normal
amount of marijuana in order to die. This explains why overdosing on marijuana
is basically unheard of.

## What Happens If You Take Too Much?

![What Happens If You Take Too

Much?](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)(Photo:
Shutterstock)

While it's impossible to die from a marijuana overdose, taking too much of the
drug can lead to unpleasant symptoms.

This phenomenon is commonly referred to as "greening out”, or what doctors
call acute THC toxicity.

**Symptoms of marijuana overdose include:**

See Also ![Fibromyalgia image](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/FibromyalgiaImage1Colourized.jpg)

Health

###### Can Marijuana Help With Fibromyalgia?

  * Dizziness
  * Increased heart rate
  * Shortness of breath
  * Turning pale
  * Anxiety/paranoia
  * Hallucinations
  * Vomiting
  * Inability to move
  * Disorientation
  * Trembling

Emergency room visits due to overdose are on the rise in areas where marijuana
has been legalized. In most cases, these incidents involve inexperienced
users, and people trying edibles for the first time.

It’s easier to green out from an edible for a few reasons. When someone smokes
marijuana, the psychoactive effects show up almost immediately. But when taken
orally, it can take 1-3 hours before the user notices the effects.

Inexperienced users may believe the edible isn’t working, and consume excess
amounts. Once the effects take hold, the result is an overpowering high.

Another concern is accidental consumption. It’s very important to clearly
label any marijuana edibles so children or unwitting adults don’t mistakenly
consume them.

Symptoms resulting from an overdose of THC usually last for a short duration,
but severe cases of overdose can last for several days.

## What To Do In Case of Marijuana Overdose

![Offering a helping hand to someone who is greening out or overdosing on

marijuana](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)(Photo:
Shutterstock)

If you or someone you know is experiencing symptoms of a marijuana overdose,
don't panic. A marijuana overdose is only temporary, and symptoms will
eventually subside.

Here are a few steps you can take to help the person feel more comfortable and
to keep them safe.

  1. **Stay with them.** Use your judgment to see if they need someone with them the whole time, or just to check up on them.
  2. **Find a safe place for them to hang out for the next hour or two.** It’s important not to move too fast as they may be dizzy.
  3. **Remind them they’re only feeling this way because of the weed.**
  4. **Keep them hydrated** , especially if they’re throwing up.
  5. **Don’t let them ingest any more marijuana, alcohol, or other drugs.**
  6. **Remember it will pass.** A good trick is to look at the clock: they’ll probably feel at least a bit better in an hour.
  7. **Seek medical attention.** If things don 't improve or symptoms worsen, seek emergency medical attention. While overdosing on marijuana won't result in death, it's always better to get help from a medical professional, especially in severe cases.

## Summary

Marijuana does not pose a risk of lethal overdose. In other words, you can't
die from smoking too much weed.

Regardless, it’s certainly possible for users to consume too much marijuana at
once. This is called overdosing or "greening out".

Greening out is most likely among inexperienced users, or those who consume
edibles. However, the effects are not permanent and symptoms eventually
subside.

If you or a friend has consumed too much marijuana, keep hydrated, stay with
people you know, and seek medical attention if things worsen.

#### Sign Up to Our Newsletter

Get notified about exclusive offers every week!

SIGN UP

I would like to receive news and special offers.

Tags

amount of marijuana needed to overdose amount of marijuana to overdose can you
overdose on marijuana can you overdose on marijuana edibles how do you
overdose on marijuana how many people have died from marijuana overdose how
much marijuana does it take to overdose how much marijuana to overdose how to
treat marijuana overdose is it possible to overdose on marijuana marijuana
overdose amount marijuana overdose effects marijuana overdose symptoms medical
marijuana overdose what happens if you overdose on marijuana

0 Comments

__ 0

__

__ 1

__

1 Shares

__ Share 0

__ Tweet

__ Pin 1

__ Share

![indica vs sativa leaves](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/04/indica-vs-sativa-leaves.jpg)

Strains

###### Indica vs. Sativa: What's The Difference?

Previous Article

![Marinol package](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/10/Marinol1.jpg)

Health

###### What is Marinol (Dronabinol)?

Next Article

View Comments (0)

#### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

You must be logged in to post a comment.

###### Related Posts

![where to buy edibles](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2017/08/EdiblesWheretobuy.jpg) Edibles

###### Marijuana Edibles: A Beginner's Guide

Featured

![Love Drug: How Cannabis can enhance your sex

life](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Sex-beyond-

midlife-older-couple-20x20.jpg)

###### Love Drug: How Cannabis can enhance your sex life

  * March 26, 2019
  * 4 mins Read
  * 0 Shares 

![Cannabis Tolerance](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/01/shutterstock_1120527056-1.jpg)

###### How Can I Lower My Cannabis Tolerance?

  * January 30, 2019
  * 3 mins Read
  * 0 Shares 

![The Best Marijuana Edibles](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/01/The-Best-Marijuana-Edibles-.jpg)

###### Five of the Easiest Edibles you can try at Home

  * January 23, 2019
  * 3 mins Read
  * 0 Shares 

Topics

  * Edibles
  * Extracts
  * Vaporizers
  * Strains
  * Marijuana 101
  * Cannabinoids

Stay Connected

__

Facebook

22.5K

__

Twitter

4.2K

Subscribe for newsletter

Leave this field empty if you're human:

  * About
  * Contact
  * Write
  * Privacy
  * Terms

![Leaf Science](https://www.leafscience.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/leafscience_logo.png)

__

Facebook

__

Twitter

© 2013-2019 LEAF SCIENCE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

#### Sign Up to Our Newsletter

Get notified about exclusive offers every week!

SIGN UP

I would like to receive news and special offers.

PRESS ESC TO CLOSE

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

