

  * __
  * Disease of Addiction
  * About Us

›

  * Our Approach

›

  * Admissions

›

  * Treatment Centers

›

  * Detox

›

  * Addiction

›

  * Rehab

›

  * Discover

›

  * Alumni
  * Treatment Professionals
  * Our Research
  * Search

Call (888) 966-8152

  * searchCreated with Sketch.

Search

  * Menu

**Ready to get help?** Our Admission Navigators are available **24/7.**
**(888) 966-8152**

  * Home
  * marijuana rehab
  * long term effects

right-arrow copy

# Dangers of Marijuana: Long-Term Effects on the Brain and Body

Reviewed by Amanda Lautieri, B.A.

Last Updated: April 29, 2019

Call (888) 966-8152

### Table of Contents

  * Endocannabinoids and What They Do
  * Marijuana and Memory Problems
  * From Youth to Adulthood
  * Conditions of the Heart
  * Marijuana Use by Pregnant or Nursing Mothers
  * The Risk of Addiction and Testicular Cancer
  * Health Risks and Research Restrictions
  * The Cannabis Consensus

About the reviewer

Amanda Lautieri, B.A.![american addiction centers

photo](https://admin.americanaddictioncenters.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/11/Amanda-Lautieri-150x150.jpg)

Amanda Lautieri is a Senior Content Editor at American Addiction Centers. She
has more than 10 years of professional editing experience that includes
working as a web editor for several major online publishers and editing
medical content ranging from academic texts to online training and re-
certification courses for emergency medical service responders.

### Verify Your Insurance

We’ll verify your benefits and let you know if you’re eligible for care at an
American Addiction Centers facility.

Check My Benefits

Marijuana is one of the most popular drugs on the market today. While it may
have the impression of being a harmless, fun substance, it is still a drug
that changes what goes on in the mind, sometimes with significant
consequences. The long-term effects on the brain and body make marijuana a
dangerous drug to a lot of people, leading to negative outcomes that don’t
show until years later.

## Endocannabinoids and What They Do

To understand what marijuana does to a user in the long run, it’s necessary to
look at how the drug works in the brain. Marijuana is as effective as it is
because its active chemical compound (tetrahydrocannabinol, or THC) mimics
substances called _endocannabinoids_ that the human body produces on its own.
In the brain, endocannabinoids work by controlling the production of
neurotransmitters (chemical substances that facilitate communication between
the brain and the central nervous system). In the rest of the body,
endocannabinoids relax muscles, reduce inflammation, protect damaged tissue,
and regulate appetite and metabolism, among many other functions.

![long-term effects on the brain and body from using

marijuana](https://admin.americanaddictioncenters.org/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/MarijuanaLongTermEffects.png)

Because endocannabinoids are so important, the brain has readymade receptors
for them. Since the THC in cannabis mimics natural endocannabinoids, marijuana
is unique among other drugs in that regard. The same physiological effects
that arise from the normal application of endocannabinoids are triggered with
the use of marijuana, especially in the brain. This is why smokers experience
memory issues, augmented levels of pain, and alterations to emotion, pleasure,
and movement control.

## Marijuana and Memory Problems

![Marijuana and Memory

Problems](https://admin.americanaddictioncenters.org/wp-

content/uploads/2017/03/marijuana-and-memory.jpg)

The memory issues come from the way marijuana hits the hippocampus, the region
of the brain that regulates short-term memory. The effect of cannabis
temporarily prevents the brain from developing new memories and learning new
things, which is a form of short-term memory.

Researchers who published their findings in the _Molecular Psychiatry_ journal
discovered that heavy cannabis users are at risk for developing false
memories, even if those users had gone without smoking pot for over a month.

Such a finding is one of a number that suggests people who were regular
marijuana smokers in their teenage years are more likely to have memory
problems as adults. One such study was published in the _Hippocampus_ journal,
which found that teenagers who smoked pot every day for three years had
“abnormally shaped” hippocampal regions when they reached their early 20s.
Those individuals “performed around 18 percent worse in long-term memory
tests,” compared to other test subjects who had never smoked marijuana.

Another study published in _JAMA Internal Medicine_ noted much the same thing,
with researchers surprised that there was “such a consistent association with
verbal memory for chronic exposure to marijuana,” even when other factors
(like cigarettes and alcohol) were accounted for. As past years of marijuana
use went up, verbal memory scores went down; expressed numerically, 50 percent
of pot smokers tended to remember one fewer word from a list of 15 words. One
of the study’s authors worried that “this transient effect” could damage how
the brain processes information and how that information is recalled later.

There is much more research that suggests people who regularly smoke marijuana
(on a daily basis) for a number of years struggle with cognitive tasks more
than those who either do not smoke cannabis or who do so infrequently and/or
for shorter periods of time. According to one researcher speaking to Reuters
Health, people who smoke marijuana occasionally and then give up the habit
(“as most cannabis users do”) have a lower risk of developing problems with
their thinking power and memory. Nonetheless, he warned that cannabis is still
a drug, and all drugs have some level of harm to them.

## From Youth to Adulthood

Aside from memory, other research has looked at the long-term effects of
marijuana on dopamine. Production of the neurotransmitter that regulates the
pleasure and reward centers of the brain can be compromised if the marijuana
use is heavy, according to an article in _Molecular Psychiatry_ found. People
who smoked a lot of marijuana tested positive for lower dopamine release in
the region of the brain that also controls attention and impulsive behavior.
Participants in this study tended to start smoking pot around the age of 16
and became dependent on the substance by 20. In the month before the study was
conducted, nearly all users reported smoking marijuana on a daily basis.

A former president of the American Psychiatric Association commented on the
study, saying that there is a growing body of evidence that shows that youth
use of cannabis develops into problems in adulthood.

## Conditions of the Heart

Many of those problems manifest physically, not just psychologically.
Healthline explains that since marijuana smoke consists of a number of toxic
chemicals (such as ammonia and hydrogen cyanide), long-term exposure to
smoking can damage the bronchial passages and the lungs. Regular pot smokers
are more likely to have persistent coughs, have some trouble breathing, and
produce excess phlegm and mucus from their throats. In fact, the _Journal of
General Internal Medicine_ writes that what marijuana smoking does to
respiratory health “has some significant similarities to that of tobacco
smoking.”

Out of the respiratory system, THC (the active compound in cannabis) exits the
lungs and enters the bloodstream, where it moves throughout the body. The
National Institute on Drug Abuse cautions that the chemical can increase the
heart rate by as many as 50 beats per minute, which can last as long as three
hours. Smokers who have heart disease could be at a greater risk of heart
attack. Research from the _Journal of the American Heart Association_ suggests
that regular marijuana use can not only contribute to the possibility of a
heart attack, but also to heart rhythm disorders and stroke, even in young
people who have no other risk factors for heart disease.

The point is echoed by the American College of Cardiology, which notes that
marijuana causes irregular heart rates and increases the risk of an acute
coronary syndrome, which refers to any number of conditions that can be
brought on by the sudden interruption of the blood flow to the heart. As a
result of this, users who are susceptible to conditions of the heart are
taking a serious risk when they smoke marijuana. “Marijuana’s use,” writes the
American College of Cardiology, “may be associated with increased mortality in
patients with a history of myocardial infarctions (heart attacks).”

## Marijuana Use by Pregnant or Nursing Mothers

One of the more distressing risks of long-term effects of marijuana
consumption is found in women who are pregnant. Health Canada explains that
smoking pot during pregnancy “has been associated with long-lasting harm to
the exposed child’s memory.” In addition to potential damage done in utero,
cannabis toxins are also carried in breast milk and can be passed to the
infant during breastfeeding. The U.S. government’s National Institute of Child
Health and Development also advises against the consumption of recreational
drugs before pregnancy and during breastfeeding.

![Marijuana Use during

Pregnancy](https://admin.americanaddictioncenters.org/wp-

content/uploads/2017/03/marijuana-use-during-pregnancy.jpg)

Research has been spotty on how much risk cannabis poses to unborn and nursing
babies, but an assistant professor of maternal fetal medicine at Washington
University nonetheless cautions that “any foreign substance that doesn’t
benefit maternal or fetal health should be avoided,” and that women who want
to become pregnant or who are already pregnant play it safe when it comes to
using marijuana.

#### More on Long-Term Effects

  * Permanent Effects of Drug Abuse
  * Ambien
  * Ativan
  * Cocaine
  * Ketamine
  * Klonopin
  * Kratom
  * Lunesta

## The Risk of Addiction and Testicular Cancer

Listing “What 20 Years of Research Has Taught Us About The Chronic Effects of
Marijuana,” _Forbes_ details some other problems that arise with the long-term
consumption of cannabis, including:

  * _The risk of addiction_ : This is only for one in 10 users; however, for people who start their cannabis use in adolescence, the rate increases to one in six. Withdrawal is also a real problem; discontinuing marijuana intake after prolonged use causes disruptions to daily life through depression, insomnia, anxiety, and loss of appetite.
  * _The possibility of testicular cancer_ : A 2015 study published by _BMC Cancer_ found that “current, chronic and frequent cannabis use is associated with the development of [testicular germ cell tumors].” Doctors were quick to point out that this does not mean that marijuana causes cancer and also noted that testicular cancer is a very rare condition; however, an epidemiologist at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle warned that the relationship between cannabis and the risk of testicular cancer suggests that marijuana carries more risks than immediately evident.

Marijuana has a complicated relationship with sexual libido and function. On
the one hand, researchers in the journal of _Archives of Sexual Behavior_
noted that “the illegality of marijuana actually facilitated” the sexual
exploits of study participants, with many people using the thrill of the
illegal activity (where the purchase and use of cannabis are taboo) to augment
their sexual desires and behaviors.

However, animal studies have found that marijuana inhibits the receptors in
the erectile tissue of the (animal) penis, according to a study in the
_Journal of Sexual Medicine_ , suggesting that cannabis consumption before sex
does more to limit sexual function than it does to help it.

## Health Risks and Research Restrictions

Even as some research has suggested that long-term marijuana use carries a
minimal risk of physical consequences, such as that published in _JAMA_ ,
scientists still urge caution. “Buyer beware,” write doctors in Massachusetts,
saying that there are not as many health risks associated with heavy marijuana
use as previously thought, but health risks exist nonetheless.

The sentiment is shared by some smokers themselves. Writing in _Vice_
magazine, one user noted that most of the heavy smokers he knows get high on a
regular basis without the stereotypical feelings of laziness or paranoia. But,
he warns, “this isn’t always the case.” As time goes on, and as their habit
persists, they tend to experience greater levels of social anxiety and general
anxiousness after they smoke compared to when they go without. Some went so
far as to note that long-term weed use even changed their personalities,
making them less outgoing and socially engaged.

One negative effect the _JAMA_ scientists noticed was that people who smoked
pot for a long time tended to have worse periodontal (gum) health than others,
which in some cases led to the development of gum disease. Those same
scientists pointed out that “marijuana use is associated with increased risk
of psychotic illness, IQ decline, and downward socioeconomic mobility,” and
that even though this particular study did not find much by way of damage to
physical health, “heavy recreational cannabis use does have some adverse
consequences.”

## The Cannabis Consensus

Aside from effects on the brain and body, what else can the long-term
consumption of marijuana do? The _Clinical Psychological Science_ journal
looked at what cannabis did to midlife economic and social status, and wrote
that regular cannabis users experienced downward social mobility and financial
difficulties, like struggling with debt and cash flow.

Researching the full effects of the long-term dangers of marijuana on the
brain and body is difficult because cannabis is still a Schedule I drug in the
United States, which places “significant restrictions” on the scientific
examination and investigation that can be done with the substance.
Nonetheless, even as the legal and political trend is to move marijuana into
the mainstream, the medical community has sounded alarm bells over what years-
long exposure to cannabis can do. While doctors were surprised at the _JAMA_
_Psychiatry_ study (with one saying, “You need to be willing to change your
mind on these issues _._ ”), the consensus remains clear: Unchecked, long-term
marijuana smoking damages the brain’s capacity for memory and cognitive tasks,
and increases the risk for the development of a number of health problems
later in life.

Share **** __

About the reviewer

Amanda Lautieri, B.A.![american addiction centers

photo](https://admin.americanaddictioncenters.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/11/Amanda-Lautieri-150x150.jpg)

Amanda Lautieri is a Senior Content Editor at American Addiction Centers. She
has more than 10 years of professional editing experience that includes
working as a web editor for several major online publishers and editing
medical content ranging from academic texts to online training and re-
certification courses for emergency medical service responders.

### Verify Your Insurance

We’ll verify your benefits and let you know if you’re eligible for care at an
American Addiction Centers facility.

Check My Benefits

### I am ready to call.

(888) 966-8152

__

![american addiction centers photo](/static/aac_icon.svg)

American Addiction Centers(888) 987-1784 200 Powell Pl Brentwood, TN 37027

![american addiction centers photo](/static/icon-twitter.svg)

![american addiction centers photo](/static/icon-facebook.svg)

![american addiction centers photo](/static/icon-linkedin.svg)

### Company

  * Our Brand Promise
  * Explore Careers
  * Treatment Centers
  * Alumni
  * Investor Relations
  * Contact Us

### Resources

  * Guide to Helping a Loved One
  * Treatment Resources for Veterans
  * Substance Abuse & HIV/AIDS
  * Treatment of Firefighters & First Responders
  * Information on 12-Step Programs

### Legal

  * Notice of Privacy Practices
  * Online Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Use

Copyright © American Addiction Centers 2019

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

