

  * ![](data:image/svg+xml;base64,PD94bWwgdmVyc2lvbj0iMS4wIiBlbmNvZGluZz0idXRmLTgiPz48IURPQ1RZUEUgc3ZnIFBVQkxJQyAiLS8vVzNDLy9EVEQgU1ZHIDEuMS8vRU4iICJodHRwOi8vd3d3LnczLm9yZy9HcmFwaGljcy9TVkcvMS4xL0RURC9zdmcxMS5kdGQiPjxzdmcgdmVyc2lvbj0iMS4xIiBpZD0iTGF5ZXJfMSIgeG1sbnM9Imh0dHA6Ly93d3cudzMub3JnLzIwMDAvc3ZnIiB4bWxuczp4bGluaz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMTk5OS94bGluayIgeD0iMHB4IiB5PSIwcHgiIHdpZHRoPSI4MDBweCIgaGVpZ2h0PSIxMTZweCIgdmlld0JveD0iMCAwIDgwMCAxMTYiIGVuYWJsZS1iYWNrZ3JvdW5kPSJuZXcgMCAwIDgwMCAxMTYiIHhtbDpzcGFjZT0icHJlc2VydmUiPjxwYXRoIGZpbGw9IiNGRkZGRkYiIGQ9Ik00NzIuMzE2LDc0LjI4aDM5Ljg1NmMwLjkxNiwwLDEuMzcxLTAuNDYyLDEuMzcxLTEuMzgyYzAtNi40MTYtOS4zMTEtMjYuNTg4LTI3LjMzNi0yNi41ODhjLTE2LjYzNCwwLTI4LjU1MiwxOS4xMDUtMjguNTUyLDMzLjkyNGMwLDIwLjE3MywxMi41MjEsMzMuOTMzLDMwLjM5MSwzMy45MzNjMTQuMDQ1LDAsMjQuNDI3LTkuNDcyLDI2Ljg3Ny0yMy41MzdoLTIuNDVjLTIuMTI4LDEyLjUzMS0xMS42MDIsMjEuMDktMjQuNDI3LDIxLjA5Yy0xNC4zNTQsMC0xNS44ODQtMTIuMjI3LTE1LjczLTIzLjA3NVY3NC4yOEw0NzIuMzE2LDc0LjI4eiBNNDk4Ljg4NCw3MC43NjJjMCwwLjYwOS0wLjMwNSwxLjA3MS0xLjA3LDEuMDcxaC0yNS40OTh2LTQuMjgxYzAtOS43NzYsMy4yMDktMTguODAyLDEzLjg5NC0xOC44MDJjMTAuMDg3LDAsMTIuNjc2LDkuMDI1LDEyLjY3NiwxOC44MDJMNDk4Ljg4NCw3MC43NjJMNDk4Ljg4NCw3MC43NjJ6IE01NDcuNTk4LDExNmgxLjA2MWwxNi4xOS0zOC4wNTNMNTgxLjc5NSwxMTZoMS4wNzFsMjIuNDUyLTUxLjgxMmMzLjM1Mi03Ljc5Myw1LjE4Mi0xMi4wNzEsMTQuNjUtMTIuMDcxdi0yLjQ0MUg1OTMuNHYyLjQ0MWg0LjEyNGM1LjE5MiwwLDcuMTc5LDEuNjgzLDcuMTc5LDQuNTgxYzAsMi4yOTktMC42MTcsNC43NDItMi40MzksOC44NjdsLTE0LjUwOSwzMy40NzJsLTIwLjE1My00Ni45MmgxMi4yMTN2LTIuNDQxSDUxMS4yNXYyLjQ0MWg4LjI0Mkw1NDcuNTk4LDExNnogTTUzNC40NjIsNTIuMTE3aDE5LjA5MmwxMC4wNzMsMjIuOTI3bC05Ljc3MiwyMi45MjJMNTM0LjQ2Miw1Mi4xMTd6IE02MTkuMzU2LDExMy4yNDhoMi4yOThjMC4zMDItMy4yMTEtMC4xNi01LjY1NiwxLjgzNC01LjY1NmMzLjA1MywwLDYuNzEzLDYuNTc1LDE4Ljc3OSw2LjU3NWMxMS43NTQsMCwyMS4yMi05LjMyNiwyMS4yMi0yMy41MzdjMC0xMC41NDMtNS4wNDQtMTcuMjcxLTE3LjQxLTE4LjAzNWwtNS4xOS0wLjMwNGMtMTAuMDc0LTAuNjA5LTE2LjAyNi0zLjM2Ni0xNi4wMjYtMTEuMzEyYzAtNy45NDMsNi4yNjEtMTIuMjI4LDE0LjA0Ny0xMi4yMjhjMTIuMDU5LDAsMTYuNjQzLDcuOTQ3LDE3LjcwNywxNi42NjVoMS45OTFsLTAuNjA5LTE4LjE5aC0yLjE0NHYxLjIyM2MwLDIuMTQzLTAuMTQ2LDMuMjA4LTEuMDY5LDMuMjA4Yy0xLjUyMSwwLTcuMTczLTUuMzQ2LTE1LjQyMi01LjM0NmMtMTEuOTExLDAtMTkuMDg0LDguNzExLTE5LjA4NCwxOS43MWMwLDE1Ljg5Niw5LjYyNSwxNy4yNzMsMTkuNTQ0LDE4LjM0OWM4LjA4NywwLjkxMywxNy4yNTQsMS4wNjMsMTcuMjU0LDEzLjEzNmMwLDguNzE1LTYuNDEyLDE0LjIxNS0xNC44MDcsMTQuMjE1Yy0xNi4wNCwwLTIwLjAxMS0xMy43NTQtMjEuMjMyLTIxLjU0NWgtMS45ODRMNjE5LjM1NiwxMTMuMjQ4eiBNNjczLjg3Myw5OC41NzRjLTQuMjc3LDAtNy43OTgsMy41MTgtNy43OTgsNy43OTJjMCw0LjI4NiwzLjUyMSw3LjgwMSw3Ljc5OCw3LjgwMWM0LjEyLDAsNy43ODMtMy41MTUsNy43ODMtNy44MDFDNjgxLjY1NiwxMDIuMDkxLDY3Ny45OTMsOTguNTc0LDY3My44NzMsOTguNTc0IE02OTguNDUzLDEwOS44ODVoLTEyLjA2N3YyLjQ1aDM2LjV2LTIuNDVINzExLjI4VjY2Ljc4OGMyLjc1NC01LjE5OCw5LjMxNi0xOC4wMzcsMjIuMTQzLTE4LjAzN2M0Ljg4NiwwLDkuMDA0LDIuNzU2LDkuMDA0LDExLjE1N3Y0OS45NzhoLTEyLjA1NXYyLjQ1aDM2Ljk0N3YtMi40NWgtMTIuMDYxVjYzLjU3N2MwLTkuMDExLTQuNTg0LTE3LjI2Ny0yMC45MTQtMTcuMjY3Yy0xMS4xNDksMC0xOC43ODYsOC4yNTYtMjIuNzU3LDE1LjU5aC0wLjMwOVY0Ni4zMWMtMi43NTEsMy4zNjUtNS40OTIsMy4zNjUtMTIuODI1LDMuMzY1aC0xMi4wNjd2Mi40NDFoMTIuMDY3VjEwOS44ODVMNjk4LjQ1MywxMDkuODg1eiBNNzc0Ljk1OSwxMDkuODg1aC0xMi4yMjZ2Mi40NUg4MDB2LTIuNDVoLTEyLjIyM1YwYy0zLjA1MSwzLjUxNy03LjkzOCwzLjgyLTEyLjgxNywzLjgyaC0xMi4yMjZ2Mi40NDRoMTIuMjI2TDc3NC45NTksMTA5Ljg4NUw3NzQuOTU5LDEwOS44ODV6Ii8+PHBhdGggZmlsbD0iI0ZGRkZGRiIgZD0iTTExNy40MjMsOTcuMjA0YzAsOC44NjIsNS40OTYsMTYuOTYzLDIwLjc2NywxNi45NjNjMTMuNTg4LDAsMjAuMDAzLTEyLjIyNiwyMS4zNzUtMTUuNzQyaDAuMzA5djEzLjkwNGgyNS4wNDJ2LTIuNDQzaC0xMi4yMTRWNDYuMzFjLTMuMDU2LDMuMDU4LTcuOTQxLDMuMzU5LTEyLjgyOSwzLjM1OWgtMTIuMDYxdjIuNDQ3aDEyLjA2MXYzNi4yMmMwLDExLjMwNy05LjQ2NywyMy4zOTEtMjAuMTU1LDIzLjM5MWMtNS44MDgsMC05LjQ2Ny00LjEzNi05LjQ2Ny0xMC43MDVWNDYuMzFjLTMuMDU1LDMuMDU4LTcuOTQxLDMuMzU5LTEyLjgyOSwzLjM1OWgtMTIuMjE0djIuNDQ3aDEyLjIxNHY0NS4wODhIMTE3LjQyM3ogTTE5My4xNjQsMTAwLjU2NmMwLDEwLjA4LDcuMDIxLDEzLjYwMSwxNy43MDcsMTMuNjAxYzExLjMwMiwwLDE1LjcyOS03Ljk1LDE2LjgwMy0xMS42MTVsLTIuMjk0LTAuNDZjLTAuOTEyLDIuNi00LjI3NCw5LjYzNS0xMS45MDgsOS42MzVjLTQuODg5LDAtNy40ODctMS45ODgtNy40ODctOC4yNThWNTIuMTE3aDIxLjA3NlY0OS42N2gtMjEuMDc2VjI4LjI3M2gtMS44MjhjLTIuNiwxNC45NzctOC4zOTgsMjEuNzAxLTI0LjI3OSwyMS4zOTZ2Mi40NDdoMTMuMjg4TDE5My4xNjQsMTAwLjU2NkwxOTMuMTY0LDEwMC41NjZ6IE0yODEuNDE3LDkwLjc3N2MtMS4wNjUsOS4zMjQtNy43ODcsMjAuOTQ5LTIzLjIwOSwyMC45NDljLTE3LjEwMiwwLTE3LjcxNC0xMi4yMjktMTcuNzE0LTI1LjUyNlY3Mi45MDZjMC0xNC41MjEsMy41MTYtMjQuMTU1LDE4LjMyLTI0LjE1NWM0LjQzNCwwLDExLjQ1NiwxLjM3OSwxMS40NTYsNC43NDRjMCwyLjI4OC0zLjgxMywxLjk4Ny0zLjgxMyw4LjEwM2MwLDMuMjA5LDIuNTk1LDYuNTY2LDcuMzI2LDYuNTY2YzMuODE1LDAsNy4zMjctMy4wNjEsNy4zMjctNy42NDZjMC05LjQ3MS0xMS4zMDEtMTQuMjA4LTIxLjk4Ni0xNC4yMDhjLTE4LjAxOCwwLTMzLjI4MywxNi41MDgtMzMuMjgzLDM2LjUyM2MwLDE3LjI2OSwxMi42NjgsMzEuMzMzLDMyLjM2NywzMS4zMzNjMTUuMTEzLDAsMjUuMTk0LTExLjc2NiwyNS42NDgtMjMuMzg5SDI4MS40MTdMMjgxLjQxNyw5MC43Nzd6IE0yOTIuNzEyLDEwOS44ODVIMjgwLjY1djIuNDQzaDM2LjV2LTIuNDQzaC0xMS42MDZWNjYuNzg4YzIuNzM5LTUuMTksOS4zMTItMTguMDM3LDIyLjE0Mi0xOC4wMzdjNC44OCwwLDkuMDA0LDIuNzU2LDkuMDA0LDExLjE2NXY0OS45N2gtMTIuMDYxdjIuNDQzaDM2Ljk1M3YtMi40NDNoLTEyLjA2N1Y2My41NzdjMC05LjAxNS00LjU3Ni0xNy4yNjctMjAuOTIyLTE3LjI2N2MtMTEuMTQsMC0xOC43NzcsOC4yNTItMjIuNzQ4LDE1LjU5aC0wLjMwMVYwYy0zLjA1OCwzLjUxNy03Ljk0NCwzLjgyNi0xMi44MzEsMy44MjZIMjgwLjY1VjYuMjdoMTIuMDYyVjEwOS44ODVMMjkyLjcxMiwxMDkuODg1eiIvPjxwYXRoIGZpbGw9IiNFRDFDMjQiIGQ9Ik0xNC41MSwxMDkuODg1SDB2Mi40NDNoNDcuOTUzYzMxLjMwMiwwLDUxLjkxLTIwLjQ3Myw1MS45MS01My43OTNjMC0yMC4zMjgtMTEuNDQ5LTUzLjc5OC01Mi4wNjMtNTMuNzk4SDB2Mi40NDloMTQuNTFWMTA5Ljg4NXogTTMwLjA4Miw3LjE4Nmg3LjQ4MWMzNy40MTEsMCw0NC44OTgsMjUuMjE0LDQ0Ljg5OCw1MS4zNWMwLDQ2LjE1NS0yNS41MDQsNTEuMzUtMzkuMjQ1LDUxLjM1SDMwLjA4MlY3LjE4NnoiLz48cGF0aCBmaWxsPSIjRUQxQzI0IiBkPSJNNDQ2LjQ4NSwxMTMuMjVoMS45NzlWMTUuNDM4YzAtNi4yNjksMS4yMjMtOC4yNTEsNy45NDQtOC4yNTFoNi43MTF2LTIuNDVoLTMyLjIxNXYyLjQ0OWg3LjE3MmM2LjcyNywwLDcuOTQ1LDEuOTgyLDcuOTQ1LDguMjUxdjY5LjA4MWgtMC4zMTFMMzg3Ljk5Miw0LjczN2gtMzIuMDYzdjIuNDQ5aDE0LjY1NXY5My45OTRjMCw3LjMzLTIuNDQxLDguNzA1LTkuNDU5LDguNzA1aC01LjE5NnYyLjQ1aDMyLjY3NHYtMi40NWgtNi4xMDJjLTcuMDI2LDAtOS40NjUtMS4zNzUtOS40NjUtOC43MDVWMTIuMDc5aDAuM0w0NDYuNDg1LDExMy4yNXoiLz48L3N2Zz4=)
  * Menu

  *     * News
    * Home
    * Politics
    * Business
    * Society
    * Sport
    * Education
    * Health
    * Tech & Media
    * International
    * Europe
  *     * Features
    * Home
    * Books
    * Columns
    * Life & culture
    * 10 Questions
    * Travel
  *     * Blogs
    * Home
    * Submit your blog…
  *     * Jobs
    * Home
    * Find out more…
  *     * Housing
    * Home
  *     * Best of the Web
    * Home
  *     * Donate
  *     * Advertise

![Dutch News brings daily news from The Netherlands in

English](data:image/svg+xml;base64,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)

Friday 07 June 2019

  * News
    * Home
    * Politics
    * Business
    * Society
    * Sport
    * Education
    * Health
    * Tech & Media
    * International
    * Europe
  * Features
    * Home
    * Books
    * Columns
    * Life & culture
    * 10 Questions
    * Travel
  * Blogs
    * Home
    * Submit your blog…
  * Jobs
    * Home
    * Find out more…
  * Housing
    * Home
  * Best of the Web
    * Home
  * Donate
  * Advertise

# Police catch 1,250 people driving under the influence of drugs

Society

September 28, 2018

![](https://www.dutchnews.nl/wpcms/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Breathalyser-

test.jpg)

Photo: Depositphotos.com

Dutch police have caught 1,250 people driving under the influence of drugs
since on-the-spot saliva tests were introduced a year ago, broadcaster NOS
said on Friday.

Most had taken cannabis but a number were also driving after taking
amphetamines and cocaine, police said on Friday. Almost half those stopped had
more than one drug in their system, including alcohol.

The public prosecution department said the figures are a major concern. 'It is
worrying that so many people are driving after taking drugs,' the organisation
said. Police spokesman Achilles Damen said the figures show that police will
continue to use the test on drivers in spot checks.

New legislation introduced last July makes it easier for the authorities to
prosecute people caught driving under the influence of drugs. So far, 350
cases have gone to court. The most common sentence is a fine plus a driving
ban

The fine for cannabis use is €850 pus a driving ban of a couple of months.
Those caught using other drugs face community service plus longer driving
bans, NOS said.

The saliva test indicates that the person has been taking drugs, but a lab
test is needed to establish exactly what. There is no 'safe' limit in law,
unlike with alcohol.

**DutchNews.nl** has been free for 12 years, but now we are asking our readers
to help. Your donation will enable us to keep providing you with fair and
accurate news and features about all things Dutch.  
**Donate via Ideal, credit card or Paypal.**

### Features

![](https://www.dutchnews.nl/wpcms/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/euthanasia.jpg)

Why international newspapers reported the death of Noa Pothoven as
'euthanasia'...when it wasn't

![](https://www.dutchnews.nl/wpcms/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/renevanassel-

werklozeasielzoekers-310519-FINAL-94x70.jpg)

Wynia's Week: Refugees need to work before they get settled in

![](https://www.dutchnews.nl/wpcms/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Rune-100x67.jpg)

'I am here because of the international feeling and flavour of Amsterdam'

![](https://www.dutchnews.nl/wpcms/wp-

content/uploads/2019/05/SeniorSchool4-100x63.jpg)

Amity opens new senior school in Amstelveen

* * *

* * *

###### ## Daily newsletter

SIGN UP

* * *

###### ## Search

* * *

### Best of the web

  * She's watched over this WWII soldier's grave for 74 years
  * Dutch Eurosceptics dream of united front to roll back EU
  * Major city or model village? Amsterdam miniaturised – in pictures

* * *

* * *

* * *

  * News
    * Politics
    * Business
    * Society
    * Sport
    * Health
    * Education
    * Tech & media
  * Features
    * Columns
    * Life & culture
    * 10 Questions
    * Best of the web
    * Podcast
  * Community
    * Blogs
    * Jobs
    * Housing
    * Comments
    * Facebook
      * Twitter
      * LinkedIn
  * About us
    * The team
    * Advertising
    * RSS Feed
    * Privacy
    * Contact
    * Terms of use
  * Services Amsterdam
    * Amsterdam bed and breakfast
    * Klusjesman Amsterdam
    * Loodgieter Amsterdam
      * Timmerman Amsterdam
  * Other services
    * SEO by Webton
    * Dutch health insurance
    * Voice Over Cowboys
    * Voice-over

* * *

(C) 2019 DutchNews | website by Vindustries

![sponsored](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAIAAAAAAAP///yH5BAEAAAAALAAAAAABAAEAAAIBRAA7)

## Help us to keep providing you with independent daily news and longer reads

Dutchnews.nl is independent and receives no state or other funding. We work
with professional journalists, translators and photo agencies who understand
the Netherlands well. All this comes at a price.

**Donate**

**Remind me later**

**No thanks**

×

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

