

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

        
                  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4181515/img/28977)
          * Skip to main content
          * Skip to navigation
          * Resources
            * All Resources
            * Chemicals & Bioassays
              * BioSystems
              * PubChem BioAssay
              * PubChem Compound
              * PubChem Structure Search
              * PubChem Substance
              * All Chemicals & Bioassays Resources...
            * DNA & RNA
              * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
              * BLAST (Stand-alone)
              * E-Utilities
              * GenBank
              * GenBank: BankIt
              * GenBank: Sequin
              * GenBank: tbl2asn
              * Genome Workbench
              * Influenza Virus
              * Nucleotide Database
              * PopSet
              * Primer-BLAST
              * ProSplign
              * Reference Sequence (RefSeq)
              * RefSeqGene
              * Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
              * Splign
              * Trace Archive
              * UniGene
              * All DNA & RNA Resources...
            * Data & Software
              * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
              * BLAST (Stand-alone)
              * Cn3D
              * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
              * E-Utilities
              * GenBank: BankIt
              * GenBank: Sequin
              * GenBank: tbl2asn
              * Genome ProtMap
              * Genome Workbench
              * Primer-BLAST
              * ProSplign
              * PubChem Structure Search
              * SNP Submission Tool
              * Splign
              * Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST)
              * All Data & Software Resources...
            * Domains & Structures
              * BioSystems
              * Cn3D
              * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
              * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
              * Structure (Molecular Modeling Database)
              * Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST)
              * All Domains & Structures Resources...
            * Genes & Expression
              * BioSystems
              * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
              * E-Utilities
              * Gene
              * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Database 
              * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Datasets
              * Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) Profiles
              * Genome Workbench
              * HomoloGene
              * Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
              * RefSeqGene
              * UniGene
              * All Genes & Expression Resources...
            * Genetics & Medicine
              * Bookshelf
              * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
              * Genetic Testing Registry
              * Influenza Virus
              * Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
              * PubMed
              * PubMed Central (PMC)
              * PubMed Clinical Queries
              * RefSeqGene
              * All Genetics & Medicine Resources...
            * Genomes & Maps
              * Database of Genomic Structural Variation (dbVar)
              * GenBank: tbl2asn
              * Genome
              * Genome Project
              * Genome Data Viewer (GDV)
              * Genome ProtMap
              * Genome Workbench
              * Influenza Virus
              * Nucleotide Database
              * PopSet
              * ProSplign
              * Sequence Read Archive (SRA)
              * Splign
              * Trace Archive
              * All Genomes & Maps Resources...
            * Homology
              * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
              * BLAST (Stand-alone)
              * BLAST Link (BLink)
              * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
              * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
              * Genome ProtMap
              * HomoloGene
              * Protein Clusters
              * All Homology Resources...
            * Literature
              * Bookshelf
              * E-Utilities
              * Journals in NCBI Databases
              * MeSH Database
              * NCBI Handbook
              * NCBI Help Manual
              * NCBI News & Blog
              * PubMed
              * PubMed Central (PMC)
              * PubMed Clinical Queries
              * All Literature Resources...
            * Proteins
              * BioSystems
              * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
              * BLAST (Stand-alone)
              * BLAST Link (BLink)
              * Conserved Domain Database (CDD)
              * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
              * E-Utilities
              * ProSplign
              * Protein Clusters
              * Protein Database
              * Reference Sequence (RefSeq)
              * All Proteins Resources...
            * Sequence Analysis
              * BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool)
              * BLAST (Stand-alone)
              * BLAST Link (BLink)
              * Conserved Domain Search Service (CD Search)
              * Genome ProtMap
              * Genome Workbench
              * Influenza Virus
              * Primer-BLAST
              * ProSplign
              * Splign
              * All Sequence Analysis Resources...
            * Taxonomy
              * Taxonomy
              * Taxonomy Browser
              * Taxonomy Common Tree
              * All Taxonomy Resources...
            * Training & Tutorials
              * NCBI Education Page
              * NCBI Handbook
              * NCBI Help Manual
              * NCBI News & Blog
              * All Training & Tutorials Resources...
            * Variation
              * Database of Genomic Structural Variation (dbVar)
              * Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP)
              * Database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (dbSNP)
              * SNP Submission Tool
              * All Variation Resources...
          * How To
            * All How To
            * Chemicals & Bioassays
            * DNA & RNA
            * Data & Software
            * Domains & Structures
            * Genes & Expression
            * Genetics & Medicine
            * Genomes & Maps
            * Homology
            * Literature
            * Proteins
            * Sequence Analysis
            * Taxonomy
            * Training & Tutorials
            * Variation
          * About NCBI Accesskeys
        

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PubMed

US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health

Search databaseAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarCloneConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarESTGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO
ProfilesGSSGTRHomoloGeneIdentical Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

        
                  * Advanced
          * Help
        

## Result Filters

        
                  * Format: Abstract
        

Format

        
                  * Summary
          * Summary (text)
          * Abstract
          * Abstract (text)
          * MEDLINE
          * XML
          * PMID List
        

Apply

#### Send to

Choose Destination

        
                  * File
          * Clipboard
          * Collections
          * E-mail
          * Order
          * My Bibliography
          * Citation manager
        
          * FormatSummary (text)Abstract (text)MEDLINEXMLPMID ListCSV
        

Create File

        
                  * 1 selected item: 3709011
          * FormatSummarySummary (text)AbstractAbstract (text)MEDLINEXMLPMID ListMeSH and Other Data
          * E-mail
          * Subject
          * Additional text
          * E-mail
        

Didn't get the message? Find out why...

Add to Clipboard

Add to Collections

Order articles

Add to My Bibliography

Generate a file for use with external citation management software.

Create File

Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 1986 Mar;13(1):19-31.

# Role of abortion in control of global population growth.

Mumford SD, Kessel E.

### Abstract

No nation desirous of reducing its growth rate to 1% or less can expect to do
so without the widespread use of abortion. This observational study, based on
the experience of 116 of the world's largest countries, supports the
contention that abortion is essential to any national population growth
control effort. The principal findings are: Except for a few countries with
ageing populations and very high contraceptive prevalence rates, developed
countries will need to maintain abortion rates generally in the range of
201-500 abortions per 1000 live births if they are to maintain growth rates at
levels below 1%. The current rate in the USA is 426 abortions per 1000 live
births. Developing countries, on the other hand, are faced with a different
and more difficult set of circumstances that require even greater reliance on
abortion. No developing nation wanting to reduce its growth to less than 1%
can expect to do so without the widespread use of abortion, generally at a
rate greater than 500 abortions per 1000 live births. Widespread availability
of abortion is a necessary but not sufficient condition to achieve growth
rates below 1%. A high contraceptive prevalence is essential as well in order
to achieve growth rates below 1%. A high contraceptive prevalence is a
necessary but not sufficient condition to achieve population growth rates
below 1%. A high rate of abortion (generally 201-500 or more abortions per
1000 live births in the developed and greater than 500 abortions per 1000 live
births in the developing countries) is essential to achieve growth rates below
1%. The different and more difficult set of circumstances faced by developing
countries that will necessitate even higher abortion rates than developed
countries includes a young population with resultant rapidly growing numbers
of young fertile women, poor contraceptive use-effectiveness, low prevalence
of contraception, and poor or non-existent systems for providing
contraceptives. These data show that high death rates of infants and children
can moderate population growth rates--a most undesirable solution. The data in
this report suggest that actual alternatives are high death rates of infants
and children or widespread use of contraception and abortion. African nations
tend to have the very lowest abortion rates and the very highest infant and
child death rates. To avoid a world with deteriorating social, economic and
political stability, with the concomitant loss of personal and national
security, we must ensure that safe abortion is made available to all who wish
to use this service.

#### PIP:

Population control is an important but neglected social benefit of abortion.
To examine this role, the outhors compared population growth rates and
abortion (legal and illegal) incidence rates for the 116 largest countries in
the world. These 116 countries were first ranked by their abortion rates into
4 groups: very high (greater than 500/1000 live births), high (201-500/1000),
moderate (50-200/1000) and low (less than 50/1000). Then each of these 4
groups was ranked according to contraceptive prevalence: very high (60% or
above), high (40-59%), moderate (15-39%), and low (less than 15%). Within each
of the 16 groups, the countries were then ranked according to their population
growth rate. The age distribution and mortality of children under 5 years of
age were also considered for each country. The data indicate that where
abortion and contraceptive prevalence rates are the highest and populations
are the oldest, growth rates tend to be the lowest. As contraceptive
prevalence decreases, the growth rate increases. The younger the population,
the greater the growth rate. Where the abortion rate is very high with only
modest use of contraception, a high growth rate can result. Thus, abortion is
necessary but not sufficient to cause low growth rates. With the exception of
a few countries with aging populations and very high contraceptive prevalence
rates, developed countries need to maintain abortion rates in the range of
201-500/1000 if they are to maintain growth rates at levels below 1%. An even
greater reliance on abortion--over 500/1000 live births--is required in
developing countries to reduce population growth.

PMID:

        
                3709011
        
         [Indexed for MEDLINE]
        

Share

### Publication types, MeSH terms

#### Publication types

        
                  * Comparative Study
          * Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
        

#### MeSH terms

        
                  * Abortion, Criminal*
          * Abortion, Legal*
          * Birth Rate
          * Contraception Behavior
          * Developing Countries
          * Female
          * Humans
          * Population Control*
          * Population Growth
          * Pregnancy
        
          * ## Supplemental Content
        

![Loading ... ](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4185393/img/3631476)

You are here: NCBI > Literature > PubMed

Support Center
![](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_app=entrez&ncbi_db=pubmed&ncbi_pdid=abstract&ncbi_phid=CE8A5621CF9B0FB10000000004AA02E4)

## Simple NCBI Directory

        
                  * ### Getting Started
        
          * NCBI Education
          * NCBI Help Manual
          * NCBI Handbook
          * Training & Tutorials
          * Submit Data
          * ### Resources
        
          * Chemicals & Bioassays
          * Data & Software
          * DNA & RNA
          * Domains & Structures
          * Genes & Expression
          * Genetics & Medicine
          * Genomes & Maps
          * Homology
          * Literature
          * Proteins
          * Sequence Analysis
          * Taxonomy
          * Variation
          * ### Popular
        
          * PubMed
          * Bookshelf
          * PubMed Central
          * BLAST
          * Nucleotide
          * Genome
          * SNP
          * Gene
          * Protein
          * PubChem
          * ### Featured
        
          * Genetic Testing Registry
          * GenBank
          * Reference Sequences
          * Gene Expression Omnibus
          * Genome Data Viewer
          * Human Genome
          * Mouse Genome
          * Influenza Virus
          * Primer-BLAST
          * Sequence Read Archive
          * ### NCBI Information
        
          * About NCBI
          * Research at NCBI
          * NCBI News & Blog
          * NCBI FTP Site
          * NCBI on Facebook
          * NCBI on Twitter
          * NCBI on YouTube
          * Privacy Policy
        

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

