

  * News
  * NBC News NOW
  * Nightly News
  * Meet the Press
  * Dateline
  * MSNBC
  * TODAY

  * # Pride50

  * Politics
  * U.S. News
  * Business
  * World
  * Tech & Media
  * THINK
  * Sports

##

  * Share this --
  *     *       *         *           * 

Search

### Sections

  * U.S. News
  * Politics
  * World
  * Local
  * Business
  * Health
  * Investigations
  * Culture Matters
  * Science
  * Sports
  * Tech & Media
  * Trump Effect
  * In Focus
  * Russia Investigation
  * Photos
  * Weather

### TV

  * Today
  * MSNBC
  * Nightly News
  * Meet The Press
  * Dateline

### Featured

  * NBC NEWS NOW
  * THINK
  * MACH
  * BETTER
  * NIGHTLY FILMS
  * NBC LEFT FIELD
  * ASIAN AMERICA
  * NBC LATINO
  * NBCBLK
  * NBC OUT
  * STAY TUNED
  * SPECIAL FEATURES

### More from NBC

  * CNBC
  * NBC.COM
  * NBC LEARN
  * Peacock Productions
  * Next Steps for Vets
  * Parent Toolkit
  * NBC Archives
  * Know Your Value

### Follow NBC News

  *     *       * 

Search

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Email
  * SMS
  * Print
  * Whatsapp
  * Reddit
  * Pocket
  * Flipboard
  * Pinterest
  * Linkedin

## Global Power

# Foreign cartels embrace home-grown marijuana in pot-legal states

Foreign gangs are finding that black-market marijuana is profitable even in
states that have legalized cannabis.

![Image: An El Paso County sheriff's deputy processes bags of distribution-

ready marijuana seized from an illegal grow

house](https://media1.s-nbcnews.com/j/newscms/2018_22/2442536/180523-el-paso-

county-marijuana-

seizure-2-ew-202p_923be8092b2f9c0bdfb86ff38a1eca7d.fit-760w.jpg)

An El Paso County sheriff's deputy processes bags of distribution-ready
marijuana seized from an illegal grow house in Colorado Springs, Colorado on
May 15, 2018.Andrew Blankstein / NBC News

## Breaking News Emails

Get breaking news alerts and special reports. The news and stories that
matter, delivered weekday mornings.

SUBSCRIBE

May 29, 2018, 8:31 AM UTC / Updated May 29, 2018, 12:28 PM UTC

By Dennis Romero, Gabe Gutierrez, Andrew Blankstein and Robert Powell

LOS ANGELES — Attorney General Jeff Sessions called it “one of the largest
residential forfeiture actions in American history.”

In early April, local and federal authorities descended upon 74 marijuana grow
houses in the Sacramento area they say were underwritten by Chinese organized
crime. They filed court paperwork to seize the properties, worth millions of
dollars.

Federal officials allege that legal recreational marijuana states like
California, Colorado and Washington, where enforcement of growing regulations
is hit-or-miss, have been providing cover for transnational criminal
organizations willing to invest big money to buy or rent property to achieve
even bigger returns.

Chinese, Cuban and Mexican drug rings have purchased or rented hundreds of
homes and use human trafficking to bring inexperienced growers to the United
States to tend them, federal and local officials say.

The suspects are targeting states that have already legalized marijuana "in an
attempt to shroud their operations in our legal environment here and then take
the marijuana outside of the state," said Mike Hartman, executive director of
the Colorado Department of Revenue, which regulates and licenses the cannabis
industry. Authorities say they've seen an increase in these "home grows" since
the launch of recreational pot sales in Colorado.

## Inside a raid on a Cuban drug den in Colorado

May 29, 201803:52

While California and Washington have mainly seen organized criminals from
China buying homes and converting them into grow houses, Colorado has largely
been grappling with Cuban and Mexican-led cartels, said Sheriff Bill Elder of
the El Paso County Sheriff's Office in Colorado.

"They have found that it's easier to grow and process marijuana in Colorado,
ship it throughout the United States, than it is to bring it from Mexico or
Cuba," Elder said.

## A 'massive' marijuana network

In El Paso County, NBC News witnessed firsthand the damage a commercial-scale
cannabis grow can do to a home otherwise built for an average American family.
Growers pose as legitimate renters, and by the time authorities disrupt their
operation, homes have been gutted and trashed.

"We've fallen through floors," U.S. Drug Enforcement Angecy Special Agent
Randy Ladd said. "The electrical damage, they draw so much current that you'll
see, in some places, the wires are fused inside of the electrical box. And — a
lot of people — they don't wanna pay the high electric bills. So what they do
is they take jackhammers and pickaxes and they cut through the foundation of
the house, so that they could steal the power."

Confiscated marijuana sits outside a suburban Colorado Springs rental home-
turned-illegal grow house on May 15.Andrew Blankstein / NBC News

One of the biggest busts so far came last June, when the Colorado attorney
general’s office announced that “a massive illegal interstate marijuana
distribution and cultivation network stretching from Colorado to Texas” had
been dismantled. It was allegedly Chinese-connected, Ladd said.

Authorities said the network was responsible for securities fraud, millions of
dollars of laundered cash, 2,600 “illegally cultivated” marijuana plants and
4,000 pounds of harvested cannabis, according to the Colorado attorney
general's statement.

The operation took place in 18 warehouses and storage units and 33 homes,
mostly in the Denver area, authorities said. “These seizures are believed to
only scratch the surface,” the office said.

Ladd alleged that some Chinese crews cover immigrants’ costs of traveling to
America in exchange for work in the grow houses. “It’s like indentured
servitude,” he said. “It is a form of human trafficking.”

## What to know about marijuana's mind-altering chemical — THC

May 6, 201802:15

The workers often fly from China to Belgium, and from Belgium to Mexico,
before making asylum claims at the border and then disappearing by the time
they’re scheduled to tell their stories in court, Ladd said. Often when grow
houses are raided, immigration fugitives are discovered, he said.

The grow homes are usually purchased by shell property management companies,
Ladd said. “These growers can hide in plain sight,” he said.

## How foreign cartels operate in the U.S.

The Sacramento-area raids, which also struck Calaveras, Placer, San Joaquin,
El Dorado, Yuba and Amador counties, shed some light on how many of the
foreign rings operate.

Northern California-based DEA Special Agent Casey Rettig said suspects send
cash to the United States in $9,999 increments, just below the mandated
reporting threshold, and receive funds from China that fly under that nation’s
$50,000 foreign spending limit. They then purchase homes with the help of cash
lenders instead of traditional mortgage firms.

#### Related

business

### businessGrowing like a weed? California marijuana market off to slow start

Last fall, a scenario fitting that pattern unfolded in Grays Harbor County,
Washington, southwest of Seattle, as a drug task force busted an alleged
cultivation ring funded by organized crime in China.

More than 40 suspects were arrested and $80 million worth of cannabis was
seized, the Grays Harbor County Sheriff’s Office said. “The majority of these
homes were purchased with cash, and information was developed that these
purchases were conducted by Chinese nationals involved in organized crime,”
according to a statement from the Sheriff’s Office.

And just this month, search warrants were served at 19 locations in the Puget
Sound area of Washington state, a federal official who did not want her name
used said. The ring was allegedly run by three Chinese nationals who produced
thousands of pounds of cannabis destined for greater New York, the U.S.
attorney’s office in Seattle alleges.

The suspects, who face drug conspiracy charges, purchased homes with the help
of multiple wire transfers from China that included dollar figures — $2,000 to
$5,900 — they believed would fly under the radar, according to a federal
complaint.

Marijuana plants found during a Drug Enforcement Administration raid in an
illegal pot grow home in Colorado.Drug Enforcement Administration

Ultimately it was the houses’ exorbitant electricity use — up to 38,477
kilowatt hours in one day versus the American average of just 30 — that made
them targets of a federal investigation, according to the filing.

Even a single grow house can contain a large marijuana operation. In April,
police in Pomona, California, an exurb in Los Angeles County, announced they
discovered a 23-room grow house allegedly run by Chinese nationals. Fifty-
five-hundred marijuana products, including 2,900 plants and nearly 21 pounds
of cannabis, were seized, police said.

It’s like indentured servitude. It is a form of human trafficking.

“The grow operation used advanced systems of lighting, air conditioning, fans,
exhaust blowers and air-filtering systems to control the climate inside the
buildings and the odor of marijuana,” according to a Pomona police statement.

Pomona police spokeswoman Aly Mejia said a gun and $6,900 in cash were also
found.

The DEA’s Rettig, speaking from her base in San Francisco, said the Chinese
operations are “illegal under state law.” In California, marijuana growers,
producers and retailers need state and local licenses. Cities can opt out and
ban such businesses altogether.

Rettig said even with the Golden State’s sky-high housing market — the median
price of a home is $535,100, according listings site Zillow — overseas
criminals know that “marijuana can fetch three times as much out of state.”

“There’s a great profit motive in it,” the DEA's Ladd said. “In Colorado,
marijuana legalization has magnified the black market. The standard price per
pound here is $2,000, but they can get $3,500 to $4,500 by shipping it back
East. The profits are great there.”

  * About
  * Contact
  * Careers
  * Privacy policy
  * Terms of Service
  * NBCNews.COM Site Map
  * Advertise
  * AdChoices

(C) 2019 NBC UNIVERSAL

  *     *       * 

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

