

![Addiction Resource](https://addictionresource.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/addiction-resource-logo.png)

Free & Confidential Drug Hotline. Call NOW: (888)-459-5511

Menu

  * Addiction Guides
    * Addiction Facts
    * What is Addiction?
    * Recognizing Addiction
    * Drug Abuse Statistics
    * Substance Abuse Triggers
    * Polydrug Use: Get the Facts
    * Drug Testing
    * Addiction Stories
    * Meth Addiction Stories
    * Heroin Addiction Stories
    * Gambling Addiction Stories
    * Marijuana Addiction Stories
    * Cocaine Addiction Stories
    * People at Risk
    * College Students abd Drug Abuse
    * Dual Diagnosis
    * Teenagers and Students
    * Veterans and Addictions
    * PTSD and Addiction
    * Self-Assessment
    * ![Alcohol Addiction Self-Assessment](https://addictionresource.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Alcohol-Addiction-Self-Assessment-Button.png)
    * ![Drug Addiction Self-Assessment](https://addictionresource.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Drug-Addiction-Self-Assessment-Button.png)
  * Substances
    * Alcohol Addiction
    * Effects of Alcoholism
    * Alcoholism Treatment
    * Alcoholism Recovery
    * Alcoholism Resources
    * Street Names of Addictive Substances
    * Understanding Drugs
      * Types of Drugs
      * Illicit Drugs
      * Marijuana
      * Crystal Meth
      * Spice
      * Cocaine
      * Crack
      * GHB
      * Amphetamine
      * Speed
    * Prescription Medication
    * Ambien
    * Ketamine
    * Gabapentin
    * Accutane
    * Provigil
    * Zoloft
    * Prozac
    * Trazodone
    * Paxil
    * Barbiturates
      * Fioricet
    * Stimulants
      * Nicotine
      * Adderall
      * Kratom
      * Ecstasy
      * Ritalin
      * Dexedrine
    * Benzodiazepines
    * Valium
    * Restoril
    * Midazolam
    * Librium
    * Klonopin
    * Halcion
    * Ativan
    * Xanax
    * Hallucinogens
      * LSD
      * AL-LAD
      * Peyote
      * DMT
      * Ayhuasca
      * Shrooms
      * Sedative-Hypnotics
      * Lunesta
      * Sonata
    * Opioids
    * Opiates
    * Heroin
    * Opium
    * Opana
    * Suboxone
    * Vicoprofen
    * Methadone
    * Fentanyl
    * Dilaudid
    * Demerol
    * Codeine
    * Tramadol
    * Oxycodone
    * Hydrocodone
    * Vicodin
    * Norco
    * Morphine
    * Percocet
    * Other Substances
    * Sleeping Pills
    * OTC Drugs
    * Diet Pills
    * Inhalants
    * Painkillers
    * Narcotics
    * Antidepressants
    * Cymbalta
    * NPC
    * Anxiety Medication
    * Cyclobenzaprine
    * Lexapro
    * Baclofen
    * Vyvanse
    * Phenibut
    * Kava
    * Celexa
    * Imodium
    * Meloxicam
  * Treatment Guides
    * Treatment Stages
    * Addiction Treatment: the Overview
    * 1 ► Intervention
    * 2 ► Inpatient and Outpatient Therapy
    * 3 ► Lifelong Commitment
    * Treatment for Substance Abuse: An Overview of Addiction Recovery Programs
    * Resources
    * Relapse Prevention Plan
    * Support Groups: An Overview
    * When a Loved One Has an Addiction
    * Drug Addiction Medications
    * Addiction and Rehab Hotlines
    * Find AA meetings
    * Find NA Meetings
    * Addiction Treatment Facility Locator![Treatment Facility Locator](https://addictionresource.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/treamtent-facility-locator.png)
  * Rehab Guides
    * Facilities
    * Best Drug Rehabs
    * Inpatient Rehabs F.A.Q.
    * Outpatient Rehabs F.A.Q.
    * Drug Rehabs Near You
    * Outpatient Rehabs Near You
    * Types
    * Court Ordered Rehabs
    * Free and State Funded Rehabs
    * Rehabs for Veterans
    * Dual Diagnosis Rehabs
    * F.A.Q.
    * Rehab Question Answered
    * Can I Beat an Addiction On My Own?
    * How Long Does Rehab Take?
    * Medicaid and Medicare
    * Addiction Recovery Costs
    * Substances
    * LSD Rehab
    * Heroin Rehabs
    * Cocaine Rehab
    * Crystal Meth Rehab
    * GHB Rehab
    * Ecstasy Rehab
  * About Us
    * Our Community
    * Scholarship
    * About Us
    * Contact Us
    * Privacy Policy
    * Addiction Treatment Events![](https://addictionresource.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/calendar-of-events-icon-1.png)
  * 

# Marijuana High - The Dangers of the Recreational Use of Marijuana

![](https://addictionresource.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Marijuana-

High.jpg)

Free 24/7 rehab helpline > (888)-459-5511

Marijuana has a renowned reputation for its relaxing effects on the user. It
is known to create euphoria at the time of use, and many choose to get high on
weed for that exact feeling. But how long does a weed high last? What type of
drug is marijuana in terms of high effects? And are there any negative lasting
effects as it begins to wear off? This article investigates and explains the
post-consumption negative effects of weed, as well as how being high on weed
feels and how long the high affects you.

![Addiction professional with a phone](/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/CALL-

woman-2.png)

Hope Without Commitment

Find the best treatment options.Call our **free and confidential** helpline

Treatment Is Fully Covered by Insurance In Most Cases

(888)-459-5511

**Table of contents:**

  * What Are The Features of Marijuana Recreational Effects? 
  * What Does Marijuana Feel Like?
  * What are the Marijuana After the High Effects?

## The Features of Marijuana Recreational Effects

![Marijuana leaves piled on top of one

another.](https://addictionresource.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/weed-

leaves.jpg)

Marijuana is popular for a few reasons. Medicinally, it has been known to aid
in preventing cancerous growths and even had a positive effect on Alzheimer's
disease. Marijuana is also increasingly popular recreationally. This is when
people use the drug to get a weed high, as its effects are enjoyed socially.

Weed is popular recreationally, not just for its effects, but for the range of
safe and straightforward ways it can be taken in comparison to other drugs.
According to the marijuana studies held by National Institute On Drug Abuse,
pot may be smoked in a bong, a cigarette, vaped or even eaten. Due to the
range of ways Marijuana can be consumed, weed highs are less predictable in
length. So how long does a weed high last when smoked, consumed or vaped in a
form of marijuana concentrates?

The answer to that question is all relative. Your **BMI (body mass index)** ,
diet, level of health and many more factors come in to play when it comes to
working out how long a Marijuana high may last. In addition to that, the
dosage is taken also has a huge impact. Marijuana coffee, for example, has a
relatively small dose of the weed psychoactive element. However, one thing is
for sure, when you eat Marijuana is has a more powerful effect due to more of
the **THC (tetrahydrocannabinol)** reaching the areas of your body where it
might have an impact; meaning you will be high for longer if you eat the same
dose of Marijuana instead of smoke it. Note that marijuana addiction may
develop notwithstanding the type of intake.

## What Does Marijuana Feel Like?

There are many names for weed, however, they all have the same psychoactive
element - THC. In short, THC, the chemical found in Marijuana mimics the
chemicals in the brain. This then alters the users' perceptions of the world
and how they feel. How a Marijuana high feels depends on a variety of factors,
such as how it is taken, how much is smoked and the individual taking the
drug. Marijuana highs can feel both positive and negative. Note that only
female weed is able to produce buds which are used for smoking. Male marijuana
plant can be used for breeding purposes only.

**Some feelings induced by Marijuana high include** :

  * **![Man smoking marijuana from pipe outdoors.](https://addictionresource.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/man-weed.jpg)**Spacing out
  * Loss of perception of time and place
  * Increased sensory awareness
  * Body relaxation 
  * Drowsiness or fatigue
  * Sudden bursts of energy
  * Forgetfulness
  * Euphoria and happiness, loss of care.

In addition to the feelings of a marijuana high, there may also be widespread
**side effects during or after use**. These may include:

  * **Increased desire to eat** - Due to the changes Marijuana creates in your brain. The part of your brain that tells you to stop eating is suddenly altered, and the desire to eat can be constant.
  * **Increased desire to drink** - Due to the body getting confused with how much saliva it should produce. Because it creates too much, weed users often feel dehydrated.
  * **Increased need to sleep** - Marijuana not only contains compounds that make you tired, but the THC in the drug also alters the sleep/wake cycle.
  * **The craving for more weed** - Often a sign that an addiction to the drug is developing and is one of the more dangerous side effects.

## What are the Marijuana After the High Effects?

![Doctors hands holding Marijuana

leaf/symbol.](https://addictionresource.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/doctor-

weed.jpg)

One of the worst after high effects of being high on Marijuana is the
hangover. Marijuana comedowns may last for several days, although they tend to
be shorter. The length of the after high effects of Marijuana depend on the
person and how much they smoked. These factors also affect the severity of the
comedown. Note that the aftereffects of marijuana use during pregnancy or in
any other specific condition are much more difficult to predict.

**There are some common after-high effects, including:**

  * **Fatigue** - This often develops due to the person experiencing a weed high which energizes them and therefore leaves them tired after.
  * **Nausea** - Often be linked to not having sleep or eating pattern when high and therefore upsetting the body physically.
  * **Anxiety** - After losing the calming effects of weed, people can often become overwhelmed and anxious.
  * **The desire to drink and eat a lot** - Cravings can also develop after the high as well as during the high.
  * **Cravings for more weed** - As with every drug, Marijuana is highly addictive, and after a high, the user may want more.
  * **Insomnia** - Once the relaxing effects of Marijuana wear off, anxiety returns and can keep you awake. Being awake causes other impacts to heighten. 
  * **Sweating and temperature change** - A natural response of your body attempting to deal with the drug in your system.
  * **Depression** - After the carefree effects of weed wear off, worries and problems often return stronger. Because of this, along with insomnia, depression builds.

Some of these marijuana withdrawal symptoms can be dangerous if you go through
extremely severe symptoms alone. Effects such as insomnia, depression, and
anxiety might damage your mental health in the long term as well as the short
term. Marijuana detox drinks are not always helpful in such cases and
professional help is required.

## The Feeling Of Marijuana - How To Know When To Stop

In the right amount, Marijuana can be helpful to anxieties and health-related
issues. However, if taken too often or in quantities too great, it can be a
health hazard instead. Knowing when to stop smoking or consuming the drug is
vital. If you begin to feel a tolerance developing to the effects of the drug,
then you should probably slow your consumption. In addition to that, if you no
longer feel positive effects but only negative effects instead, which is also
a cue to stop and start seeking the treatment program for substance abuse.
Note that the treatment does not necessarily mean the abstinence from work or
college. The outpatient rehabilitation center is a great option to undergo
therapy without radical changes.

**Marijuana can be a useful drug, but knowing and recognizing your limits is
important to use it effectively and healthily.**

![Addiction professional with a phone](/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/CALL-

woman-2.png)

Hope Without Commitment

Find the best treatment options.Call our **free and confidential** helpline

Treatment Is Fully Covered by Insurance In Most Cases

(888)-459-5511

These are also all ways to tell if someone is high on weed. If you or someone
around you is experiencing these desires to smoke more weed and experiencing
the more extreme symptoms, then they may be becoming susceptible to addiction
or even overdose. In this case, you should seek immediate medical assistance.
For further information on how to get the most suitable help for, call our
hotline at **(888)-459-5511**.

Marijuana High - The Dangers of the Recreational Use of Marijuana

4 (80%) 1 vote

Addiction Resource » Addictive Substances: The Anatomy of Drug Addiction » Is
Weed Addictive? Marijuana Use, Abuse, and Addiction » Marijuana High - The
Dangers of the Recreational Use of Marijuana

### Comments __3

  * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/8fb2e528e1480007cea691049168376b?s=60&d=mm&r=g) **Mimi**

May 6, 2019 at 5:42 pm Reply

I am 77 with degenerative spine disease, mild class2 chronic kidney disease.
My back pain is extreme and reduces my quality of life. I cannot take NSAIDS
due to my kidneys. I'm interested in edible weed for pain relief so I can
exercise to increase stamina. Can you comment if this is practical?

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/90f900bb4493fce8786747cb1a9d10b3?s=60&d=mm&r=g) **Anonymous**
    

May 15, 2019 at 10:01 pm Reply

THC or CBD? Edibles are iffy if you are going with THC, as the THC gets
processed in the liver and makes the chemical way more potent than if you
smoked it. This can lead to ingesting just too much pot and can cause vomiting
which can dehydrate you. Also, THC is what makes you high, it can cause
hallucinations-auditory, physical, and visual. THC does make you take your
mind off of things because your body feels too stimulated by everything going
on around you, so you tend to focus on one thing, and try not to focus on your
back pain, as you will just try to see if it’s helping you with your pain and
you find out that you back hurts(forgot to mention that senses feel amplified)
worse than ever. THC is more of a funtime chemical than CBD. CBD is today’s
miracle drug and is legal in many states, it gelps with pain, anxiety,
insomnia, etc. Don’t have much to say about CBD, but it would help you with
your pain, you could try both if you’d like, see how they treat you n stuff.
Hope this helps!

    
    
    * ![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/90f900bb4493fce8786747cb1a9d10b3?s=60&d=mm&r=g) **Anonymous**
    

May 15, 2019 at 10:03 pm Reply

Some strains of marijuana also make you feel like you weigh tons and make you
feel stuck.

### Leave a Reply Cancel reply

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

  * ### Free 24/7 Treatment Helpline

#### (888)-459-5511

#### Speak confidentially with a compassionate counsellor.

Feel hope  
without commitment.

  * Learn More About Marijuana Addiction

  * Marijuana Addiction Overview

  * Marijuana Drug Type
  * Indica And Sativa Strains
  * Pot Abuse Facts And Statistics
  * How To Get Medical Weed Card
  * Cannabis Nicknames
  * Marijuana Street Price
  * Marijuana High
  * Weed Paraphernalia
  * Marijuana-Infused Edibles
  * Drinking Marijuana
  * Signs Of Weed Use And Abuse
  * Cannabis Effects On Body
  * Weed Effects On Brain
  * Marijuana Side Effects
  * Pot Overdose
  * What Is Dabbing Weed
  * Signs Of Dabbing Marijuana
  * How Long Pot Stays In System
  * Marijuana Withdrawal
  * Marijuana Detox
  * Weed Use In Teens
  * Marijuana And Pregnancy
  * Does Weed Cause Cancer?
  * Cannabis Addiction Treatment
  * Marijuana Relapse

  * Drug Rehab Resources

  * Best Rehabs

  * Local Rehabs Locator
  * Free Rehabs
  * Court-Ordered Rehabs
  * Inpatient Rehabs
  * Outpatient Rehabs
  * Jewish Rehabs
  * Veterans Rehabs
  * Holistic Rehabs
  * LGBT Rehab Centers
  * Dual Diagnosis Rehab Centers
  * Alcohol Hotlines
  * Rehab Hotlines
  * Luxury Rehabilitation
  * Private Rehabs
  * Christian Rehabs
  * Women-Only Rehabs
  * Men-Only Rehabs
  * Rehabs for Couples
  * Family Rehabs
  * Teen Rehabs
  * State-Funded Rehabs
  * No-Insurance Rehabs
  * Executive Rehabs
  * Resort Rehabs

## Drug Rehab Information

Speak to a representative concerning substance abuse treatment or request
printed material on alcohol or drugs.

(888)-459-5511

The information available at AddictionResource.com is not a substitute for
professional medical help.

This site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health
information:

verify here

(C) 2014 - 2019 Addiction Resource

  * Terms And Conditions
  * Privacy Policy
  * Contact Us
  * About Us

➤

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

