

**Warning:** The NCBI web site requires JavaScript to function. more...

  * NCBI![NCBI Logo](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/28977)
  * Skip to main content
  * Skip to navigation
  * Resources
  * How To
  * About NCBI Accesskeys

My NCBISign in to NCBISign Out

# PMC

US National Library of Medicine  
National Institutes of Health

Search databasePMCAll
DatabasesAssemblyBiocollectionsBioProjectBioSampleBioSystemsBooksClinVarCloneConserved
DomainsdbGaPdbVarESTGeneGenomeGEO DataSetsGEO
ProfilesGSSGTRHomoloGeneIdentical Protein GroupsMedGenMeSHNCBI Web SiteNLM
CatalogNucleotideOMIMPMCPopSetProbeProteinProtein ClustersPubChem
BioAssayPubChem CompoundPubChem
SubstancePubMedSNPSparcleSRAStructureTaxonomyToolKitToolKitAllToolKitBookghUniGene

Search term

Search

  * Advanced
  * Journal list
  * Help

  * Journal List

  * Curr Oncol
  * v.23(Suppl 2); 2016 Mar
  * PMC4791148

![Logo of curroncol](/corehtml/pmc/pmcgifs/logo-curroncol.gif)

Curr Oncol. 2016 Mar; 23(Suppl 2): S8–S14.

Published online 2016 Mar 16. doi: 10.3747/co.23.3099

PMCID: PMC4791148

PMID: 27022315

# Integrating cannabis into clinical cancer care

D.I. Abrams, MD*

### D.I. Abrams

*Hematology-Oncology, San Francisco General Hospital; Integrative Oncology, UCSF Osher Center for Integrative Medicine; and University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, U.S.A.

Find articles by D.I. Abrams

Author information Copyright and License information Disclaimer

*Hematology-Oncology, San Francisco General Hospital; Integrative Oncology, UCSF Osher Center for Integrative Medicine; and University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, U.S.A.

Correspondence to: Donald I. Abrams, Ward 84, 995 Potrero Avenue, San
Francisco, California 94110 U.S.A. E-mail: ude.fscu@smarbA.dlanoD

Copyright 2016 Multimed Inc.

This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.

## Abstract

_Cannabis_ species have been used as medicine for thousands of years; only
since the 1940s has the plant not been widely available for medical use.
However, an increasing number of jurisdictions are making it possible for
patients to obtain the botanical for medicinal use.

For the cancer patient, cannabis has a number of potential benefits,
especially in the management of symptoms. Cannabis is useful in combatting
anorexia, chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, pain, insomnia, and
depression. Cannabis might be less potent than other available antiemetics,
but for some patients, it is the only agent that works, and it is the only
antiemetic that also increases appetite. Inhaled cannabis is more effective
than placebo in ameliorating peripheral neuropathy in a number of conditions,
and it could prove useful in chemotherapy-induced neuropathy. A
pharmacokinetic interaction study of vaporized cannabis in patients with
chronic pain on stable doses of sustained-release opioids demonstrated no
clinically significant change in plasma opiates, while suggesting the
possibility of synergistic analgesia.

Aside from symptom management, an increasing body of _in vitro_ and animal-
model studies supports a possible direct anticancer effect of cannabinoids by
way of a number of different mechanisms involving apoptosis, angiogenesis, and
inhibition of metastasis. Despite an absence of clinical trials, abundant
anecdotal reports that describe patients having remarkable responses to
cannabis as an anticancer agent, especially when taken as a high-potency
orally ingested concentrate, are circulating. Human studies should be
conducted to address critical questions related to the foregoing effects.

**Keywords:** Cannabis, cannabinoids, symptom management, nausea, anorexia,
pain

## INTRODUCTION

Much attention has been paid to the unearthing of the 2500-year-old mummy
known as the "Siberian Ice Maiden." Discovered in 1993, her subterranean
burial chamber included a pouch of cannabis among other archeologic findings1.
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the princess had a primary tumour in
the right breast, with axial adenopathy and metastatic disease. It is
hypothesized that the cannabis was used to manage her pain and perhaps other
symptoms, or even possibly as a treatment for her malignant disease.

Widely used as medicine during the ensuing millennia, cannabis disappeared
from the pharmaceutical armamentarium in the 1940s as its prohibition took
hold. Today, we are in the midst of what appears to be something of a
medicinal cannabis renaissance, with patients across the globe gaining
increased access to this potent botanical medicine. In a 2014 WebMD poll, 82%
of oncologists indicated their belief that patients should have access to
cannabis, ranking highest among medical subspecialists in their support2.
Regrettably, most oncologists trained during the era of cannabis prohibition
and have no knowledge of how to use the plant as medicine. In these days of
targeted therapies and nanotechnology, the modern oncologist might feel
somewhat ill at ease recommending a herbal intervention, notwithstanding the
number of potent cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents derived from plants.

An even more vexing concern to the oncologist is the lack of data on which to
base treatment recommendations. Given the nature of the drugs that they
prescribe, oncologists are used to seeing strong evidence of a favourable
risk-benefit ratio before recommending a therapeutic intervention. Usually,
oncology drugs have proceeded through preclinical studies, followed by the
traditional phase i, ii, and iii analyses, before we feel comfortable adding
them to our toolbox. Such data about the clinical effectiveness of medicinal
cannabis are all but lacking.

In the United States, cannabis is classified as a Schedule I agent with a high
potential for abuse and no accepted medical use. The study of cannabis
requires a special Schedule I license from the U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration. In addition, the only legal source of cannabis for clinical
trials is the National Institute on Drug Abuse, which has a congressional
mandate to study substances of abuse only as substances of abuse. Although
investigators can obtain National Institute on Drug Abuse cannabis to conduct
effectiveness clinical trials, funding must come from another source. Hence,
carefully controlled clinical trials of cannabis as a therapeutic agent--the
sorts of trials that would satisfy a data-driven oncologist--are quite rare.

In 1986, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (thc), the most psychoactive cannabinoid in
the plant, was approved as a licensed drug, dronabinol (Marinol: AbbVie, North
Chicago, IL, U.S.A.), for the treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and
vomiting. Hence, oncologists probably have the longest record of using a
cannabis-based medicine. In 1992, the dronabinol indication was expanded to
include treatment of the anorexia associated with aids wasting syndrome. In
2006, nabilone (Cesamet: Meda Pharmaceuticals, Somerset, NJ, U.S.A.) another
synthetic thc that had long been available in Europe and elsewhere became
available in the United States as well.

The foregoing drugs are thc alone and do not include any of the other
potentially therapeutic cannabinoids, terpenoids, or flavonoids that are
present in the whole plant3. Cannabidiol (cbd), in particular, is another of
the phytocannabinoids that has been generating significant interest for its
potential therapeutic effects4. Nabiximols (Sativex: GW Pharmaceuticals,
Salisbury, U.K.) is a whole-plant extract of cannabis that has been processed
to have a thc:cbd ratio of 1:1. Originally approved in Europe for the
treatment of central pain associated with multiple sclerosis, this sublingual
preparation has also been studied in a number of cancer-related conditions5-8.
Because most of the information derived from clinical trials on cannabinoids
in cancer is derived from studies of those licensed pharmaceuticals, the
present review discusses findings from studies of those agents as well as from
studies of cannabis itself.

## CANNABIS FOR PAIN

To date, two types of cannabinoid receptors (seven-transmembrane domain G
protein-coupled receptors) have been identified in humans and other animal
species9. The cb1 receptor, initially identified in the brain, is found in
high concentrations in areas involved in the processing of noxious stimuli.
The cb2 receptor is predominantly located in cells of the immune system and
likely has a role in the control of inflammation and cell proliferation.

The cb receptors are not present to react with the phytocannabinoids from
cannabis alone. They exist because, on demand, humans produce endogenous
cannabinoids--"endocannabinoids"--that react with the receptors, effecting
changes in intracellular signalling. It has been suggested that the entire
function of the system of cannabinoid receptors and endocannabinoids might be
to assist in modulation of the response to pain. With that in mind, it is not
surprising that an increasing body of knowledge is being developed about the
effects on pain of cannabinoid medicines.

A recently published systematic review10 considered 28 studies involving a
total of 2454 participants and preparations including inhaled cannabis,
dronabinol, nabilone, and nabiximols, among others. Twelve of the studies
investigated neuropathic pain, and three looked at patients with cancer pain.
The studies generally showed improvement in pain measures, with an overall
odds ratio of 1.41 (95% confidence interval: 0.99 to 2.00) for improvement in
pain with the use of cannabinoids compared with placebo. An earlier systematic
review of eighteen randomized controlled trials of cannabinoids in 766
participants with chronic non-cancer pain found that fifteen of the studies
reported a significant analgesic effect for the cannabinoids compared with
placebo, and a number of the studies also noted improvements in sleep11.
Another review that included six of those eighteen studies in patients with
cancer-related pain also favoured cannabinoids12.

Neuropathic pain is certainly problematic in cancer patients13. A systematic
review of six randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of
cannabinoids (five specifically addressing neuropathic pain) found evidence
for the use of low-dose medical cannabis in refractory neuropathic pain in
conjunction with traditional analgesics14. Another analysis reviewed five
trials of inhaled cannabis in patients with hiv-related peripheral neuropathy
and again found a positive effect for cannabis compared with placebo15. A
recent small study16 showed a dose-response effect for vaporized cannabis in
the relief of pain from diabetic peripheral neuropathy, a huge clinical
problem estimated to affect 238 million people worldwide.

With all of those impressive data suggesting that cannabinoids could be
effective in peripheral neuropathy, where are the studies in patients with
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy? Preclinical studies in rodent
models have suggested that cannabinoids might actually be able to prevent
peripheral neuropathy. Activation of the cb1 and cb2 receptors suppresses the
development of vincristine-induced peripheral neuropathy in rats17. In mice
receiving daily cisplatin, administration of anandamide (an endocannabinoid)
together with an inhibitor of the fatty-acid amide hydrolase that metabolizes
anandamide attenuated chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy18.
Cannabidiol pretreatment stops paclitaxel-induced neuropathy in mice19. To
date, the only human study of a cannabis-based medicine in chemotherapy-
induced peripheral neuropathy is a crossover placebo-controlled trial of
nabiximols20. Overall, reported pain scores were not different with nabiximols
and with placebo. However, on a 0-10 scale, 5 responders reported a greater
than 2-point decline in neuropathic pain. That observation suggests that 5
patients have to be treated with the sublingual preparation for 1 to
experience clinical benefit (an acceptable number-needed-to-treat for a
neuropathic condition), suggesting that further investigation of cannabis
medicines in chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy is warranted. Even
more exciting would be a study demonstrating the potential for cannabis to
actually lower the risk for neuropathy or to prevent it from developing in the
first place, as the animal models suggest.

In animal models, cannabinoids and opioids have been demonstrated to have
synergistic analgesic effects21. Analgesic effects of cannabinoids are not
blocked by opioid antagonists, suggesting that the two types of agents work
through different receptors and pathways. An early study found that thc was
ineffective as an analgesic on its own, but that it slightly increased the
effect of morphine on 2 of 3 measures22. A randomized controlled trial of
dronabinol in patients on opioids for chronic pain found that, compared with
placebo, dronabinol reduced pain ( _p_ < 0.01) and increased patient
satisfaction ( _p_ < 0.05)23. A randomized controlled trial of nabiximols in
359 cancer patients with poorly controlled pain despite a stable opioid
regimen found that the sublingual preparation (4, 10, or 16 sprays daily for 5
weeks) reduced both pain and sleep disruption24. A pharmacokinetic interaction
study of vaporized cannabis in 21 patients with chronic--mostly non-cancer--
pain taking sustained-release morphine or sustained-release oxycodone showed
no significant effect on plasma levels of the opiates, but a suggestion of
enhanced analgesia25. However, that small study was not powered for a pain
endpoint, suggesting that a larger follow-on trial is warranted26.

Clinically, I have observed that many cancer patients benefit from adding
cannabis to their pain regimen. Although the effect on chemotherapy-induced
peripheral neuropathy has not been glaringly obvious, other sorts of cancer-
related pain appear to respond. Patients who have been put on high doses of
opiates at the end of life by their well-meaning oncologist or palliative care
team frequently feel totally unable to communicate with their loved ones in
their precious remaining time because of altered cognition. Many have
successfully weaned themselves down or off their opiate dose by adding
cannabis to their regimen. Although it would seem that thc-dominant strains of
cannabis would be most likely to have analgesic effects, patients often report
significant pain reduction from strains that are predominantly cbd-rich.
Although cbd does not actually bind to the cb1 receptor, it does block the
fatty-acid binding protein that transports the endocannabinoid intracellularly
to be hydrolyzed by the fatty-acid amide hydrolase, hence allowing the
endogenous cannabinoid complexed with the receptors to persist27.

## CANNABIS FOR NAUSEA

As an oncologist practicing medicine in San Francisco since the early 1980s, I
have often said that I need a clinical trial to demonstrate that cannabis is
an effective antiemetic about as much as I need a placebo-controlled trial to
demonstrate that penicillin is an antibiotic! It would appear that, if the
single most active constituent of the plant is licensed and approved for
treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea, that the parent botanical should
also work. Being aware that the plural of anecdote is not evidence, I would
like to share an e-mail message from a 42-year-old gentleman with metastatic
colon cancer requesting a renewal of his medical cannabis authorization:

> Although I did not use it until my last 5 sessions of chemo (me getting over
the stigma of its use), it did what no other drug could do, completely solve
the severe nausea I had.

>

> It allowed me to play with my children, attend their sports and school
functions, and just function very normally in day to day activities.

>

> I cannot thank you enough for giving me that option!

>

> I am currently on a chemo vacation after a clean scan, and the only time I
use medical marijuana now is when I have trouble sleeping. I would like to
continue to use it for that purpose instead of relying on pharmaceutical
options like zolpidem etc.

That message is representative of what many patients have recounted to me over
the past 30-plus years of oncology practice in a locale in which patients have
never had difficulty accessing cannabis. However, data from controlled
clinical trials of cannabis are less impressive.

Only three trials have looked at cannabis in the treatment of chemotherapy-
induced nausea and vomiting, and in two of them, cannabis was made available
only after dronabinol had already failed. The first trial noted a significant
benefit for cannabis compared with placebo in patients receiving high-dose
methotrexate28. A later study by the same investigators made cannabis
available to patients receiving cyclophosphamide or doxorubicin after
dronabinol failure, and no beneficial effect was noted29. The third study
investigating cannabis was a randomized crossover trial in 20 patients who
received dronabinol and cannabis30. Overall, 5 of the patients reported a
positive antiemetic response. Of the entire cohort, 4 patients preferred
smoked cannabis, 7 preferred dronabinol, and 9 had no preference. A recent
phase ii investigation in 16 patients of nabiximols, the sublingually
delivered whole-plant extract, found that 4.8 sprays daily was more effective
than placebo in conjunction with standard antiemetics31.

Data from studies investigating the synthetically available versions of Δ9-thc
have provided more convincing evidence. A quantitative systematic review32
that included 30 randomized comparisons of oral nabilone, oral dronabinol, or
the intramuscular levonantradol preparation (no longer available) with placebo
in 1366 patients receiving chemotherapy found that, as antiemetics,
cannabinoids were more effective than prochlorperazine, metoclopramide,
chlorpromazine, thiethylperazine, haloperidol, domperidone, or alizapride
(risk ratio: 1.38; 95% confidence interval: 1.18 to 1.51). For complete
control of nausea, the number needed to treat was 6, and it was 8 for complete
control of vomiting. In crossover trials, the patients preferred cannabinoids
for future chemotherapy cycles. A later systematic review33 of thirty
randomized controlled trials involving 1138 patients also found that
cannabinoids were more effective than placebo or conventional antiemetics in
reducing chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, and that patients preferred
the cannabinoids. Adverse effects were noted to be more intense and to occur
more frequently in patients using cannabinoids. A more recent systematic
review10 of twenty-eight randomized controlled trials (twenty-three using
nabilone or dronabinol) involving 1772 participants reported an overall
benefit for cannabis. A Cochrane review34 analyzed twenty-three randomized
controlled trials of cannabinoids compared with placebo or with other
antiemetic drugs. Patients were more likely to report a complete absence of
nausea and vomiting with cannabis than with placebo, and there was little
discernable difference between the effectiveness of cannabinoids and of
prochlorperazine, metoclopramide, domperidone, and chlorpromazine. Notably,
however, none of the trials involved the agents now most widely used--the
serotonin 5-HT3 antagonists. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network
guidelines cautiously mention cannabinoids as a breakthrough treatment for
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting not responsive to other
antiemetics35.

## CANNABIS FOR APPETITE STIMULATION

Although cannabis is the only antiemetic that is also orexigenic, no clinical
trials investigating the plant as a treatment for cancer-related anorexia-
cachexia syndrome have been conducted to date. A randomized placebo-controlled
clinical trial evaluating a cannabis extract and dronabinol in 243 patients
with cancer-related anorexia-cachexia syndrome found that neither preparation
was superior to placebo with respect to affecting appetite or quality of
life36. A large study of 469 advanced cancer patients randomized participants
to receive the progestational agent megestrol acetate or dronabinol, or
both37. Compared with participants in the dronabinol group, those in the
megestrol arm experienced a significantly greater increase in both weight and
appetite, and combining dronabinol with megestrol offered no additional
benefit compared with megestrol alone. One smaller study of dronabinol in
cancer patients demonstrated enhanced chemosensory perception in the treatment
group compared with the placebo group38. In the dronabinol recipients, food
tasted better, and appetite and caloric intake increased. Similarly variable
and largely unimpressive results for dronabinol with respect to appetite and
weight in hiv-associated wasting have also been reported39.

## CANNABIS FOR CANCER

One of the lay accounts concerning the tomb of the Siberian Ice Maiden closes
with these lines:

> Modern-day scientists have increasingly been turning their attention to
cannabis due to its potential to inhibit or destroy cancer cells, and at the
very least, manage the pain and symptoms that come with the illness. But then,
ancient people seem to have known that already.40

That sort of a leap--assuming that because the Ice Maiden was buried with
cannabis and had cancer, that she was using it to treat her cancer--is about
as valid as the claims being made on the Internet today that highly
concentrated cannabis oils can cure cancer. It might be possible, but there
is, as yet, no solid evidence to support that belief. One of the more
distressing situations that oncologists increasingly face is trying to counsel
the patient who has a curable diagnosis, but who seeks to forego conventional
cancer treatment in favour of depending on cannabis oil to eradicate their
malignancy because of the large number of online testimonials from people
claiming such results. Given my long practice in San Francisco, I can assume
that a large proportion of my patients have used cannabis during their
journey. If cannabis cured cancer, I would have a lot more survivors in my
practice today. Granted, inhaled cannabis cannot deliver the concentration of
active ingredients that a heavily concentrated thc or cbd oil can, but there
is as yet no convincing demonstration that the _in vitro_ or animal model
findings translate into the clinical arena.

One of the earliest studies suggesting that cannabinoids might have anticancer
activity came from the U.S. National Cancer Institute in a paper published in
197541. Investigators reported that Δ9-thc, Δ8-thc, and cbd inhibited the
growth of Lewis lung adenocarcinoma cells _in vitro_ and in mice. For unclear
reasons, that line of research was not pursued further at the National
Institutes of Health in the United States, but was subsequently picked up by
investigators in Spain and Italy, who have made enormous contributions to the
field.

If cannabinoids are postulated to have a potential anticancer effect working
through the cb1 receptor, it would follow that the brain--where the cb1
receptor is the most densely populated seven-transmembrane domain G protein-
coupled receptor--would be a good place to start the investigation. And, in
fact, numerous studies _in vitro_ and in animal models have suggested that
cannabinoids can inhibit gliomas42. Other tumour cell lines are also inhibited
by cannabinoids _in vitro,_ and cannabinoid administration to nude mice curbs
the growth of various tumour xenografts representing multiple solid and
hematologic malignancies, including adenocarcinomas of the lung, breast,
colon, and pancreas, and also myeloma, lymphoma, and melanoma43 ,44.

A discussion of the mechanism of action of cannabinoids as anticancer agents
is beyond the scope of the present article, but has been reviewed
elsewhere45-48. Cannabinoids appear to induce apoptosis, probably through
interaction with the cb1 receptor. Cannabinoid administration in mouse models
has been observed to reduce the expression of vascular endothelial growth
factor and its receptors, leading to inhibition of angiogenesis. Cannabinoids
also decrease the activity of matrix metalloproteinase 2, leading to decreased
tumour-cell invasiveness and decreased potential for metastasis. In addition,
cannabinoids have anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties that are also
desirable in combatting cancer. _In vitro_ studies have demonstrated that,
combined with gemcitabine, cannabinoids further reduce the viability of
pancreatic cancer cells49. In mice, adding thc to temozolomide (used widely in
treatment of aggressive brain tumours), reinstated glioma suppression in
tumours that had become resistant to chemotherapy50. The addition of cbd
enhanced the antitumour activity even when lower doses of thc were used.
Similarly, a combination of thc and cbd was found to enhance the antitumour
effects of radiation in a murine glioma model, suggesting that cannabinoids
might be synergistic with radiation therapy as well as with chemotherapy51.

But again, mice and rats are not people, and what is observed _in vitro_ does
not necessarily translate into clinical medicine. The preclinical evidence
that cannabinoids might have direct anticancer activity is provocative as
well, but more research is warranted. Hence, the oncologist advising patients
on the use of cannabinoids during conventional cancer treatment should be
aware of the preclinical findings and should not reflexively advise patients
to avoid cannabis altogether. Currently, we can be confident that cannabis
could have utility in symptom management for patients living with and beyond
cancer52 -54. Compared with most of the therapeutic agents that oncologists
use in their practice, the side-effect profile of cannabis as medicine is
acceptable, and the adverse effects are well described54,55. To be able to
suggest a single agent that could hold benefit in the treatment of nausea,
anorexia, pain, insomnia, and anxiety instead of writing prescriptions for 5
or 6 medications that might interact with each other or with cancer-directed
therapies seems advantageous. And although botanical-pharmaceutical
interactions for other drugs metabolized by certain cytochrome P450 isoforms
is a theoretical possibility, no significant perturbations in the plasma
concentrations of prescription medications have been seen to date when
cannabis is co-administered. The only published study investigating medicinal
cannabis with chemotherapeutic agents found no effect on the plasma
pharmacokinetics of irinotecan or docetaxel when cannabis was administered as
a herbal tea, although that delivery system is neither particularly popular
nor likely potent56. The pharmacokinetics of ingested compared with inhaled
cannabis would support an inhaled route of administration if patients desire
more control over the onset, depth, and duration of the effect.

## CONCLUSIONS

The august _New England Journal of Medicine_ published a perspective piece
describing Marilyn, a 68-year-old woman with metastatic breast cancer seeking
medical cannabis from her physician57. Interestingly, the pro and con sides of
the argument were both presented by mental health practitioners and not by
medical oncologists. In a follow-up blog poll, the authors reported finding it
surprising that 76% of the 1446 physicians responding from around the world
were in favour of medicinal cannabis, even though many came from jurisdictions
in which it is totally illegal58. The authors of a later WebMD survey of 1566
physicians in the United States reported that 82% of oncologists and
hematologists were in favour of patients having access to medical cannabis
--representing the strongest approval among all medical subspecialties2.

To summarize, cannabis and cannabinoids are useful in managing symptoms
related to cancer and its treatment. Exciting preclinical evidence suggests
that cannabinoids are not only effective in the treatment but also in the
prevention of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy. Cannabinoids could
be synergistic with opioids in the relief of pain. The safety profile of
cannabis is acceptable, with side effects that are generally tolerable and
short-lived. Preclinical data suggest that cannabinoids could have direct
antitumour activity, possibly most impressive in central nervous system
malignancies. Clinical data about the effects of cannabis concentrates on
cancer are as yet unavailable. Oncologists could find cannabis and
cannabinoids to be effective tools in their care of patients living with and
beyond cancer.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES

I have read and understood _Current Oncology_ 's policy on disclosing
conflicts of interest, and I declare the following interests: I have received
fees as an advisory board member for ABcann Medicinals, MMJ PhytoTech, Tikun
Olam, and Zynerba Pharmaceuticals.

## REFERENCES

  1. Mosbergen D. New York, NY: The Huffington Post; 2014. Now We Know What Killed the Ancient "Ice Princess", and Why She Had That Marijuana [Web article]. [Available at: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/10/16/siberian-ice-princess-cancer-cannabis_n_5993052.html; cited 19 December 2015]. [Google Scholar]

  2. Rappold RS. Atlanta, GA: WebMD; 2014. Legalize Medical Marijuana, Doctors Say in Survey [Web article] [Available at: http://www.webmd.com/news/breaking-news/marijuana-on-main-street/20140225/webmd-marijuana-survey-web; cited 19 December 2015] [Google Scholar]

  3. Russo EB. Taming thc: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage effects. Br J Pharmacol. 2011;163:1344–64. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2011.01238.x. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  4. Massi P, Solinas M, Cinquina V, Parolaro D. Cannabidiol as potential anticancer drug. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2013;75:303–12. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04298.x. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  5. Rog DJ, Nurmikko TJ, Fride T, Young CA. Randomized, controlled trial of cannabis-based medicine in central pain in multiple sclerosis. Neurology. 2005;65:812–19. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000176753.45410.8b. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  6. Duran M, Perez E, Abanades S, et al. Preliminary efficacy and safety of an oromucosal standardized cannabis extract in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2010;70:656–63. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2010.03743.x. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  7. Johnson JR, Burnell-Nugent M, Lossignol D, Ganae-Motan ED, Potts R, Fallon MT. Multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of the efficacy, safety and tolerability of thc:cbd extract and thc extract in patients with intractable cancer-related pain. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2010;39:167–78. doi: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2009.06.008. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  8. Lynch ME, Cesar-Rittenberg P, Hohmann AG. A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover pilot trial with extension using an oral mucosal cannabinoid extract for treatment of chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2014;47:166–73. doi: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2013.02.018. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  9. Pertwee RG, Howlett AC, Abood ME, et al. International Union of Pharmacology. lxxix. Cannabinoid receptors and their ligands: beyond cb1 and cb2. Pharmacol Rev. 2010;62:588–631. doi: 10.1124/pr.110.003004. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  10. Whiting PF, Wolff RF, Deshpande S, et al. Cannabinoids for medical use: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2015;313:2456–73. doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.6358. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  11. Lynch ME, Campbell F. Cannabinoids for treatment of chronic non-cancer pain: a systematic review of randomized trials. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2011;72:735–44. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2011.03970.x. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  12. Martin-Sanchez E, Furukawa TA, Taylor J, Martin JL. Systematic review and meta-analysis of cannabis treatment for chronic pain. Pain Med. 2009;10:1353–68. doi: 10.1111/j.1526-4637.2009.00703.x. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  13. Callaghan BC, Price RS, Feldman EL. Distal symmetric polyneuropathy: a review. JAMA. 2015;314:2172–81. doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.13611. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  14. Deshpande A, Mailis-Gagnon A, Zoheiry N, Lakha SF. Efficacy and adverse effects of medical marijuana for chronic noncancer pain: systematic review or randomized controlled trials. Can Fam Physician. 2015;61:e372–81. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  15. Andreae MH, Carter GM, Shaparin N, et al. Inhaled cannabis for chronic neuropathic pain: a meta-analysis of individual patient data. J Pain. 2015;16:1221–32. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2015.07.009. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  16. Wallace MS, Marcotte TD, Umlauf A, Gouaux B, Atkinson JH. Efficacy of inhaled cannabis on painful diabetic neuropathy. J Pain. 2015;16:616–27. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2015.03.008. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  17. Rahn EJ, Makriyannis A, Hohmann AG. Activation of cannabinoid cb1 and cb2 receptors suppresses neuropathic nociception evoked by the chemotherapeutic agent vincristine in rats. Br J Pharmacol. 2007;152:765–77. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjp.0707333. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  18. Khasabova IA, Khasabov S, Paz, Harding-Rose C, Simone DA, Seybold VS. Cannabinoid type-1 receptor reduces pain and neurotoxicity produced by chemotherapy. J Neurosci. 2012;32:7091–101. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0403-12.2012. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  19. Ward SJ, McAllister SD, Kawamura R, Murase R, Neelakantan H, Walker EA. Cannabidiol inhibits paclitaxel-induced neuropathic pain through 5-HT1A receptors without diminishing nervous system function or chemotherapy efficacy. Br J Pharmacol. 2014;171:636–45. doi: 10.1111/bph.12439. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  20. Lynch ME, Cesar-Rittenberg P, Hohmann AG. A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover pilot trial with extension using an oral mucosal cannabinoid extract for treatment of chemotherapy-induced neuropathic pain. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2014;47:166–73. doi: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2013.02.018. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  21. Cichewicz DL. Synergistic interactions between cannabinoid and opioid analgesics. Life Sci. 2004;74:1317–24. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2003.09.038. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  22. Naef M, Curatolo M, Petersen-Felix S, Arendt-Nielsen L, Zbinden A, Brenneisen R. The analgesic effect of oral delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (thc), morphine, and a thc-morphine combination in healthy subjects under experimental pain conditions. Pain. 2003;105:79–88. doi: 10.1016/S0304-3959(03)00163-5. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  23. Narang S, Gibson D, Wasan AD, et al. Efficacy of dronabinol as an adjuvant treatment for chronic pain patients on opioid therapy. J Pain. 2008;9:254–64. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2007.10.018. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  24. Portenoy RK, Ganae-Motan ED, Allende S, et al. Nabiximols for opioid-treated cancer patients with poorly-controlled chronic pain: a randomized, placebo-controlled, graded-dose trial. J Pain. 2012;13:438–49. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2012.01.003. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  25. Abrams DI, Couey P, Shade SB, Kelly ME, Benowitz NL. Cannabinoid-opioid interaction in chronic pain. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2011;90:844–51. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2011.188. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  26. Ware MA. Clearing the smoke around medical marijuana. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2011;90:769–71. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2011.241. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  27. Elmes MW, Karzocha M, Berger WT, et al. Fatty acid-binding proteins (fabps) are intracellular carriers for Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (thc) and cannabidiol (cbd) J Biol Chem. 2015;14:8711–21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.618447. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  28. Chang AE, Shiling DJ, Stillman RC, et al. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as an antiemetic in cancer patients receiving high-dose methotrexate. A prospective, randomized evaluation. Ann Intern Med. 1979;91:819–24. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-91-6-819. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  29. Chang AE, Shiling DJ, Stillman RC, et al. A prospective evaluation of delta-9-tetracannabinol as an antiemetic in patients receiving Adriamycin and Cytoxan chemotherapy. Cancer. 1981;47:1746–51. doi: 10.1002/1097-0142(19810401)47:7<1746::AID-CNCR2820470704>3.0.CO;2-4. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  30. Ben Amar M. Cannabinoids in medicine: a review of their therapeutic potential. J Ethnopharmacol. 2006;105:1–25. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2006.02.001. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  31. Duran M, Perez E, Abanades S, et al. Preliminary efficacy and safety of an oromucosal standardized cannabis extract in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2010;70:656–63. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2010.03743.x. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  32. Tramer MR, Carroll D, Campbell FA, Reynolds DJ, Moore RA, McQuay HJ. Cannabinoids for control of chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting: quantitative systematic review. BMJ. 2001;323:16–21. doi: 10.1136/bmj.323.7303.16. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  33. Machado Rocha FC, Stefano SC, De Cassia Haiek R, Rosa Oliveira LM, Da Silveira DX. Therapeutic use of Cannabis sativa on chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting among cancer patients: systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl) 2008;17:431–43. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2354.2008.00917.x. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  34. Smith LA, Azariah F, Lavender VT, Stoner NS, Bettiol S. Cannabinoids for nausea and vomiting in adults with cancer receiving chemotherapy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;11:CD009464. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  35. National Comprehensive Cancer Network (nccn) NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology: Antiemesis. Fort Washington, PA: NCCN; 2015. Ver 2.2015. [Current version available online at: http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/antiemesis.pdf (free registration required); cited 19 December 2015] [Google Scholar]

  36. Strasser F, Luftner D, Possinger K, et al. on behalf of the Cannabis-In-Cachexia-Study-Group Comparison of orally administered cannabis extract and delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in treating patients with cancer-related anorexia-cachexia syndrome: a multicenter, phase iii, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial from the Cannabis-In-Cachexia-Study-Group. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3394–400. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2005.05.1847. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  37. Jatoi A, Windschitl HE, Loprinzi CL, et al. Dronabinol versus megestrol acetate versus combination therapy for cancer-associated anorexia: a North Central Cancer Treatment Group study. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:567–73. doi: 10.1200/JCO.20.2.567. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  38. Brisbois TD, de Kock IH, Watanabe SM, et al. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol may palliate altered chemosensory perception in cancer patients: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot trial. Ann Oncol. 2011;22:2086–93. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdq727. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  39. Lutge EE, Gray A, Siegfried N. The medical use of cannabis for reducing morbidity and mortality in patients with hiv/aids. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;4:CD005175. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  40. Holloway A. London, UK: Ancient Origins; 2014. Did ancient Siberian princess use cannabis to cope with breast cancer? [Web article]. [Available at: http://www.ancient-origins.net/news-history-archaeology/did-ancient-siberian-princess-use-cannabis-cope-breast-cancer-002207; cited 19 December 2015] [Google Scholar]

  41. Munson AE, Harris LS, Friedman MA, Dewey WL, Carchman RA. Antineoplastic activity of cannabinoids. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1975;55:597–602. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  42. Velasco G, Galve-Roperh I, Sanchez C, Blazquez C, Guzman M. Hypothesis: cannabinoid therapy for the treatment of gliomas? Neuropharmacology. 2004;47:315–23. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2004.04.016. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  43. Velasco G, Sanchez C, Guzman M. Towards the use of cannabinoids as antitumour agents. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012;12:436–44. doi: 10.1038/nrc3247. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  44. McAllister SD, Soroceanu L, Desprez PY. The antitumour activity of plant-derived non-psychoactive cannabinoids. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2015;10:255–67. doi: 10.1007/s11481-015-9608-y. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  45. Massi P, Solinas M, Cinquina V, Parolaro D. Cannabidiol as potential anticancer drug. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2013;75:303–12. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2125.2012.04298.x. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  46. Chakravarti B, Ravi J, Ganju RK. Cannabinoids as therapeutic agents in cancer: current status and future implications. Oncotarget. 2014;5:5852–72. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2233. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  47. Abrams DI, Guzman M. Cannabis in cancer care. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2015;97:575–86. doi: 10.1002/cpt.108. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  48. United States Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute (nci) Bethesda, MD: NCI; 2015. Cannabis and Cannabinoids--for health professionals (PDQ) [Web page] [Available at: http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/cam/hp/cannabis-pdq; cited 11 December 2015] [Google Scholar]

  49. Donadelli M, Dando I, Zaniboni T, et al. Gemcitabine/cannabinoid combination triggers autophagy in pancreatic cancer cells through a ros-mediated mechanism. Cell Death Dis. 2011;2:e152. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2011.36. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  50. Torres S, Lorente M, Rodriguez-Fornes F, et al. A combined preclinical therapy of cannabinoids and temozolomide against glioma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011;10:90–103. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-0688. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  51. Scott KA, Daigleish AG, Liu WM. The combination of cannabidiol and Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol enhances the anti-cancer effects of radiation in an orthotopic murine glioma model. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014;13:2955–67. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0402. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  52. Walsh D, Nelson KA, Mahmoud FA. Established and potential therapeutic applications of cannabinoids in oncology. Support Care Cancer. 2003;11:137–43. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]

  53. Bowles DW, O'Bryant CL, Camidge R, Jimeno A. The intersection between cannabis and cancer in the United States. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2012;83:1–10. doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2011.09.008. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  54. Kramer JL. Medical marijuana for cancer. CA Cancer J Clin. 2015;65:109–22. doi: 10.3322/caac.21260. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  55. Borgelt LM, Franson KL, Nussbaum AM, Wang GS. The pharmacologic and clinical effects of medical cannabis. Pharamcotherapy. 2013;3:195–209. doi: 10.1002/phar.1187. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  56. Engels FK, de Jong FA, Sparreboom A, et al. Medicinal cannabis does not influence the clinical pharmacokinetics of irinotecan and docetaxel. Oncologist. 2007;12:291–300. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.12-3-291. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  57. Bostwick JM, Reisfield G M, DuPont RL. Medicinal use of marijuana. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:866–8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMclde1300970. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

  58. Adler JN, Colbert JA. Clinical decisions. Medicinal use of marijuana--polling results. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:e30. doi: 10.1056/NEJMclde1305159. [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]

* * *

Articles from Current Oncology are provided here courtesy of **Multimed Inc.**

## Formats:

  * Article |

  * PubReader |

  * ePub (beta) |

  * PDF (205K) |

  * Citation

## Share

  * ![Share on Facebook](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047626) Facebook 
  * ![Share on Twitter](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047627) Twitter 
  * ![Share on Google Plus](//static.pubmed.gov/portal/portal3rc.fcgi/4160049/img/4047628) Google+ 

Support Center Support Center

External link. Please review our privacy policy.

NLM

NIH

DHHS

USA.gov

National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of
Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD, 20894 USA

Policies and Guidelines | Contact

![statistics](/stat?jsdisabled=true&ncbi_db=pmc&ncbi_pdid=article&ncbi_acc=&ncbi_domain=curroncol&ncbi_report=record&ncbi_type=fulltext&ncbi_objectid=&ncbi_pcid=/articles/PMC4791148/&ncbi_app=pmc)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

