

# Psychology Today

  * Find a Therapist 

# Find a Therapist

Therapists v

    
    
    * Therapists
    * Treatment Centers
    * Psychiatrists
    * Support Groups
    

x

Therapists: Log In | Sign Up

  * Get Help 

#### Mental Health

    
    
    * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

#### Do I Need Help?

    
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

  * Magazine 

#### Current

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe

#### Recent

    
    
    *     *     *     * Issue Archive
    

  * Today 

#### News

    
    
    * New Research Finds Evidence That Mindfulness Helps ADHD
    * Elephants Smell Out Differences in Quantity
    * There's No "I" in Love
    * Deep Impact: Asserting Authority with a Low-Pitched Voice
    

#### Essential Reads

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/shutterstock_446567287-144x144-168_0-668_667.jpg?itok=ldjr8QEG)
    

When Collaborators Turn Into Competitors

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/sleepless2_0-144x144-178_0-900_900.jpg?itok=HH1lmZUH)
    

Problems Sleeping? Look to Your Gut

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/shutterstock_552389755-144x144-126_0-668_667_0.jpg?itok=bJ6pfIig)
    

Healthier College Students Through Texting

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2017-06/screen_shot_2017-06-27_at_9-144x144-300_0-762_763.44.01_am.png?itok=0GOSFErQ)
    

The Dangers of Reading Micro Expressions

#### Trending Topics

    
    
    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All
    

us

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

# Search

Search

Back

Psychology Today

  * Home
  * Find a Therapist
  * Get Help
  * Magazine
  * Today

Back

### Find a Therapist

#### Get Help

  *     * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
  * #### Members

    * Login
    * Sign Up
    * 

Back

### Get Help

#### Mental Health

  *     * Addiction
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Asperger's
    * Autism
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Chronic Pain
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders

#### Personality

    
    
    * Passive Aggression
    * Personality
    * Shyness
    

#### Personal Growth

    
    
    * Goal Setting
    * Happiness
    * Positive Psychology
    * Stopping Smoking
    

#### Relationships

    
    
    * Low Sexual Desire
    * Relationships
    * Sex
    

#### Family Life

    
    
    * Child Development
    * Parenting
    

#### View Help Index

    
    
    * #### Do I Need Help?
    
    * Self Tests
    

#### Recently Diagnosed?

    
    
    * Diagnosis Dictionary
    * Types of Therapy
    

#### Talk to Someone

    
    
    * Find a Therapist
    * Find a Treatment Center
    * Find a Psychiatrist
    * Find a Support Group
    

Back

### Magazine

#### The New Science of Sleep

Experts suggest ways to correct the habits that keep us from resting well.

Subscribe Issue Archive

Back

### Today

#### News

  *     * New Research Finds Evidence That Mindfulness Helps ADHD
    * Elephants Smell Out Differences in Quantity
    * There's No "I" in Love
    * Deep Impact: Asserting Authority with a Low-Pitched Voice
  * #### Essential Reads

    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/shutterstock_446567287-144x144-168_0-668_667.jpg?itok=ldjr8QEG)

When Collaborators Turn Into Competitors

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/sleepless2_0-144x144-178_0-900_900.jpg?itok=HH1lmZUH)
    

Problems Sleeping? Look to Your Gut

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/shutterstock_552389755-144x144-126_0-668_667_0.jpg?itok=bJ6pfIig)
    

Healthier College Students Through Texting

    
    
    * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_50x50/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2017-06/screen_shot_2017-06-27_at_9-144x144-300_0-762_763.44.01_am.png?itok=0GOSFErQ)
    

The Dangers of Reading Micro Expressions

  * #### Trending Topics

    * Narcissism
    * Alzheimer's
    * Bias
    * Affective Forecasting
    * Neuroscience
    * Behavioral Economics
    * #### See All

Go

![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/icons/icon-check-circle-gray.svg)
Verified by Psychology Today

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/profile/public/authors/jann_gumbiner.jpg?itok=oD96e2GH)

### Jann Gumbiner Ph.D.

The Teenage Mind

# Is Marijuana Addictive?

## Can recreational pot smokers become addicted?

Posted Dec 05, 2010

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-facebook.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-twitter.svg)TWEET

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-email.svg)EMAIL

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-sharethis.svg)MORE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-google-plus.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-linkedin.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/WhatsApp_2_@1x.svg)WHATSAPP

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-reddit.svg)SHARE

A realistic concern for recreational users of marijuana is whether or not they
will become addicted. There are no easy answers to this question. In my
opinion, the most unbiased book on this and other related topics is The
Science of Marijuana (2008). The Science of Marijuana is written by Leslie L.
Iverson, a professor of pharmacology at the University of Cambridge in
England. In the book, he reviews decades of international research on
marijuana, both laboratory research and survey research. Based on his review
of the scientific literature, between 10 to 30% of regular users will develop
dependency. Only about 9% will have a serious addiction. For an excellent post
on the biology of marijuana addiction see
http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/all-about-addiction/201001/is-marijuana-
addictive-you-can-bet-your-heroin

The large majority of people who try marijuana do it experimentally and never
become addicted. Unlike other substances, pot has very few severe withdrawal
symptoms and most people can quit rather easily. When present, withdrawal
symptoms might include: anxiety, depression, nausea, sleep disturbances and GI
problems.

Compared to other substances, marijuana is not very addicting. It is estimated
that 32% of tobacco users will become addicted, 23% of heroin users, 17% of
cocaine users, and 15% of alcohol users. Cocaine and heroin are more
physically harmful and nicotine is much more addictive. It is much harder to
quit smoking cigarettes than it is to quit smoking pot.

Recreational users of the past are often compared to todays smokers. The
smokers, the times and the pot are all different. According to Iversen,
marijuana became widely used in the US during the 1960s by Vietnam vets. This
was a time of social upheaval and strong anti-war sentiment. Youth were
rebellious and experimental pot smokers. Today's youth are different. They are
mainstream. Interestingly, many of today's young smokers are children of the
previous generation of smokers. And, my generation of marijuana smokers quit
relatively easily when they became parents and homeowners.

It is often said that today's pot is stronger. I am not sure how anybody could
know this. Readers, if you know please tell me. Are there studies comparing
THC content of 1970 pot with 2010 pot? How could this even be possible on a
large scale? Does somebody still have some 1970 pot sitting around or are we
relying on old memories? The only thing that I can surmise is that the
marijuana that is carefully cultivated indoors these days is more potent than
previous strains. In fact, this brings to mind one of my greatest
frustrations. In California, small amounts of marijuana are legal for people
with 215 cards but it is not regulated. So, how does anybody know how much THC
they are smoking? Do they even know where it was grown and how much pesticide
it contains? For example, when I buy Advil in the supermarket, I know that I
am getting 200 mg capsules.

In spite of different strains of marijuana containing different amounts of
THC, experienced smokers are able to control their high. An interesting study
reported in Iversen's book claims that regular users know how to inhale in a
way that regulates THC content. A study was conducted where experienced
smokers were given joints with either 1% or 4% levels of THC. The subjects
were blind to experimental conditions so they didn't know the THC content of
the joint. Without knowing which joint they were smoking, the smokers
automatically adjusted their inhaling to reach about the same degree of high
and THC absorption. They did this by taking longer and harder draws on the
weaker joint and breathing in more air with the more potent joint.

So, to wrap up, is marijuana addictive? For most people, no. About 10% of
recreational users will develop problems serve enough to impair their work and
relationships. Many more will come to depend on pot for relaxation and social
purposes. This will be problematic if they don't learn more effective coping
mechanisms and come to rely on marijuana instead of solving their problems.
When ready, most people will be able to quit with only mild withdrawal
symptoms. And, compared to other recreational drugs, marijuana is relatively
harmless. But, it is not completely harmless. And...what is more serious than
its addictive consequences are the legal ones. This relatively harmless herbal
plant is unregulated and illegal in the U.S.

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-facebook.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-twitter.svg)TWEET

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-email.svg)EMAIL

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-sharethis.svg)MORE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-google-plus.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-linkedin.svg)SHARE

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/WhatsApp_2_@1x.svg)WHATSAPP

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/all/modules/custom/pt_social_media/img/share-2x-reddit.svg)SHARE

113 Comments

### Very interesting, Jann

Submitted by Stanton Peele Ph.D. on December 6, 2010 - 5:12am

It seems fair enough - I guess I wonder about your clear (which you sometimes
retreat from by suggesting there are pre-addictive but problematic usage
patterns) demarcation of "addictive" - "non-addictive." For example, your
labeling alcohol as addictive among 15% of cases runs into some conceptual
complications when contemplating the discussion of "Alcoholism isn't what it
used to be" at the NIAAA Web site (or my modest article in the Sept. PT).

  * Reply to Stanton Peele Ph.D.
  * Quote Stanton Peele Ph.D.

### Hi

Submitted by Jann Gumbiner Ph.D. on December 6, 2010 - 1:17pm

Hi, Yes. I am always interested in your work and your ideas. I will follow
this up. Thanks for reading.

  * Reply to Jann Gumbiner Ph.D.
  * Quote Jann Gumbiner Ph.D.

### do write after processing stuff

Submitted by Stanton Peele Ph.D. on December 6, 2010 - 1:22pm

if you've a mind to:  
stanton@peele.net  
(we're pretty private in here)

By the way, I did write, "Marijuana is  
Addictive - So What?"  
http://www.peele.net/lib/addictive.html

  * Reply to Stanton Peele Ph.D.
  * Quote Stanton Peele Ph.D.

### marijuana addictiveness and strength compared to the 1970s

Submitted by Tad Brunton on December 28, 2015 - 12:26pm

Hi Doctor, I enjoyed your article and I wanted to comment on a couple of
things. You asked how anyone knows that today's pot is stronger than in 1970.
Simple answer, only the leaves were smoked in 1970 and today, basically only
the buds are smoked, which contain the highest levels of THC in the whole
plant. THC is the psychoactive element in the pot plant. Also, you said you
"know" that your Advil from the store has 200 mg of the active ingredient in
each capsule. i believe you might want to say that you "believe" that each
capsule has that amount in it, unless you have done laboratory tests on each
capsule. You only believe what you are told by the pharmaceutical company who
manufactures the Advil - you don't know. Anyway, nice article. Thanks. Tad

  * Reply to Tad Brunton
  * Quote Tad Brunton

### Increasing potency of marijuana

Submitted by Dale Pekar on March 31, 2018 - 4:59am

NIDA's Drug Facts article of February 2018 references the following study for
their claim that marijuana potency is increasing.

Mehmedic Z, Chandra S, Slade D, et al. Potency trends of Δ9-THC and other
cannabinoids in confiscated cannabis preparations from 1993 to 2008. J
Forensic Sci. 2010;55(5):1209-1217. doi:10.1111/j.1556-4029.2010.01441.x.

  * Reply to Dale Pekar
  * Quote Dale Pekar

### Is Marijuana more potent now?

Submitted by Rita Coleman on July 21, 2014 - 6:28am

I enjoyed reading your article Joan. I enjoyed reading it, it made me laugh
until I cried. No I am not a pot head, nor was I smoking marijuana at the
time. The comment you made as to weather marijuana was stronger today, as it
was in the 70s was what made me laugh. During the 70's marijuana was genuine.
It used to come from Mexico, so it was more potent. Today, it is home grown,
which makes it less potent, therefore they (the users) have to add other
substances such as cocaine, crack, or other dangerous chemicals in order for
the user to get high. This I believe is what makes it addictive and more
dangerous. Yes I was one of those users in the 70's, but when they started
mixing it with crack cocaine, during the 80'd I quit with no problems. Thank
you for your article.

  * Reply to Rita Coleman
  * Quote Rita Coleman

### Are you serious?

Submitted by Rob Jones on July 21, 2015 - 7:14am

Are you kidding? Weed is as much as 4 times as potent as it was in the 1970's.
This information comes from labs that tested the THC potency then and now.
Also, home-grown marijuana is no less potent than that grow in indistrial grow
houses. It strictly depends on the grow methods used. Also, who has told you
uses mix the weed with other drugs? While the lacing of weed happens, this is
not a common practice to get the user "more high".

  * Reply to Rob Jones
  * Quote Rob Jones

### strong weed

Submitted by ihj on September 12, 2016 - 12:14pm

You have absolutely no idea what you are saying. Mexican weed of 1960's
compared to the USA grown today is like comparing MD2020 to a great bottle of
Pomerol. Sure they are both wine but that is where the similarity stops.

  * Reply to ihj
  * Quote ihj

### different brains, different reactions

Submitted by Mary Sojourner M.A on December 6, 2010 - 1:08pm

I saw a beloved partner shatter into psychotic episodes from what had been
recreational firing up a bowl. I walk with one of my dearest friends as he
battles marijuana addiction. It may be important to consider that marijuana,
like mescaline and other hallucinogenic substances, is regarded as a Holy
Plant in some indigenous cultures - to be used for vision and learning. In
those cases, people are warned that using it habitually will not only destroy
its sacredness, but bring them into danger.

  * Reply to Mary Sojourner M.A
  * Quote Mary Sojourner M.A

### Thank you

Submitted by Jann Gumbiner Ph.D. on December 6, 2010 - 1:19pm

Thank you. You make a very important point and suggest a post I should write
on the sacred nature of these plants and their dangers.

  * Reply to Jann Gumbiner Ph.D.
  * Quote Jann Gumbiner Ph.D.

### Add new comment | Psychology Today

Submitted by porn videos on May 24, 2016 - 4:54am

free animal sex pics

  * Reply to porn videos
  * Quote porn videos

### Results of years of research

Submitted by jsknow on December 6, 2010 - 3:18pm

Thanks for being open minded and looking at the honest scientific facts
instead of blindly parroting the anti-marijuana propaganda promoted by our
Government and many corporations that see marijuana as unwanted competition
for their lower quality, often toxic and very often far more environmentally
harmful products.

As a PhD, I’m sure you’re aware that about 10% of the population has an
addictive personality and they’re going to get addicted to something over the
course of their life, whether it be food, sex, marijuana or something else
they like. It’s interesting to note that 10% or so of marijuana users are said
to become addicted in almost every credible study. To me that says marijuana
is not addictive at all but rather, human nature dictates that 10% of
marijuana users, or users of any other substance they like, are going to get
addicted.

Marijuana was actually introduced to the USA as a so called "recreational
drug" at least as early as the beginning of the 1900’s by migrant Mexican farm
workers, hence the earliest prohibition of marijuana being well documented as
a racial tool against Mexicans. The first law prohibiting marijuana use as a
drug was a little known 1913 CA law and marijuana was prohibited nationally in
1937. The earliest English settlers are well known to widely use hemp for a
variety of purposes. George Washington and Thomas Jefferson both grew hemp and
the very first hemp law in the USA was actually a law requiring farmers to
grow it. You could even pay your taxes with hemp in the early USA. The
founders of this Country using marijuana as a recreational drug is not well
documented but its early use as a medicine is. There was a document written by
George Washington, in which he talked about separating his male and female
hemp plants. Since the female plant, when denied pollination, provides the
strongest THC content, it’s hard to imagine why he was separating female
plants unless he was interested in using them as a drug.

The recent stronger THC content is most commonly documented by tests done by
law enforcement over the last few decades using confiscated marijuana.
Stronger THC content is often cited as meaning it is more dangerous, however
nothing could be further from the truth. As you noted, marijuana consumers
easily regulate the effects of marijuana they desire regardless of potency.
Also, marijuana itself is nontoxic. Marijuana is kind of like coffee, once you
get enough, you stop using it for a while. The only possibly toxic result of
marijuana comes from the carcinogens produced when marijuana is burned. More
potent pot equals SAFER pot because less smoke is inhaled. Marijuana can also
be eaten, vaporized or made into tea, all of which completely eliminate the
need to burn marijuana, although smoking it is the most common way it is
consumed. It’s worth noting that many studies have shown NO increased risk of
cancer or any other serious health risks even from smoking marijuana and that
marijuana contains substances which have actually shown to inhibit (possibly
prevent) cancer and many other ailments, hence its popularity as a safe
effective medicine for a wide range of ailments both severe and mild.

I don’t think marijuana use actually causes people to develop problems serve
enough to impair their work and relationships. Over many years I have seen
hundreds of marijuana consumers in every walk of life from Dr.’s to
construction workers to professional drivers use marijuana while working and I
have never seen even one accident or truly harmful result. Marijuana seems to
cause people to slow down a little and be a little more cautious but this most
often results in safer and more efficient work, rather than any harms. That's
most easily proven by many marijuana driving studies which show, unlike
alcohol consumers, marijuana consumers are only SLIGHTLY impaired, they are
aware they are slightly impaired and they slow down a little and are a little
more cautious, resulting in absolutely no increased danger to their self or
other drivers. The stigmatism of marijuana’s illegal status, the highly
inflated cost of marijuana because of it being illegal and the harm from
marijuana arrests all cause far more so called “marijuana related” negative
effects than the use of marijuana itself.

In support of my positions I offer the following information:

Many government studies have cited the relative safety of marijuana but rather
than base rational marijuana policy in science and facts, our government
ignores science and facts and promotes lies and fear mongering.

On March 22, 1972 the Richard Nixon-appointed, 13-member National Commission
on Marijuana and Drug Abuse recommended the decriminalization of marijuana,
concluding, “[Marijuana's] relative potential for harm to the vast majority of
individual users and its actual impact on society does not justify a social
policy designed to seek out and firmly punish those who use it.” Richard Nixon
chose to ignore the advice of this well qualified, expensive, taxpayer funded
commission and start the modern escalation of criminalizing marijuana
consumers. The lies he promoted have done much harm but they served his
selfish motives and got him re-elected based largely on him starting the “war
on drugs”, a violent unconstitutional unnecessary war against nonviolent
citizens, which are no threat to their selves or society and a war on
everyone’s Constitutional rights. Google: Drug War Victims.

In 1988, after reviewing all scientific evidence brought forth in a lengthy
lawsuit against the government’s prohibition of medical marijuana, the DEA’s
own administrative law judge (Judge Francis Young) wrote: “MARIJUANA, IN ITS
NATURAL FORM, IS ONE OF THE SAFEST THERAPEUTICALLY ACTIVE SUBSTANCES KNOWN. IN
STRICT MEDICAL TERMS, MARIJUANA IS SAFER THAN MANY FOODS WE COMMONLY CONSUME.”

Anyone that wants marijuana is already getting it. Legalizing and rationally
regulating marijuana based on its safety vs risks is not adding another
harmful intoxicant to society, legalizing gives people the legal opportunity
to make the SAFER CHOICE! Alcohol, tobacco, many Rx drugs, many over the
counter drugs, even caffeine, aspirin and non-aspirin, can all be deadly and
are well documented as being the direct cause of hundreds of thousands of
deaths in the USA every year! http://www.saferchoice.org/content/view/24/53/

No one, of any age, in all of recorded history, anywhere on planet earth, has
ever died from the ingredients in marijuana and they never will, marijuana is
nontoxic. Many have died from marijuana prohibition and tens of millions have
been jailed or otherwise harmed. In the US we arrest someone on marijuana
charges every 38 seconds. Marijuana charges account for roughly 50% of all
drug arrests. Would you rather have your kid locked up with killers and child
molesters or would you prefer to do your own proper parenting?

Watch this FL man that gets his marijuana from the Federal government destroy
all the lies about marijuana consumers being lazy and unproductive. Watch him
destroy all the lies about long term heavy marijuana use being harmful. Learn
the truth about marijuana: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lvzX8aNwxgM

Listen to these high ranking narcotics officers expose the harms and waste of
the drug war. Learn the truth about the drug war. It is a FAILED HARMFUL
UNCONSTITUTIONAL UNLAWFUL VIOLENT WAR AGAINST NONVIOLENT CITIZENS:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LayaGk0TMDc

The World Health Organization Documents Failure of U.S. Drug Policies
http://www.alternet.org/drugreporter/90295/

Cannabis Reduces Infant Mortality: http://www.salem-
news.com/articles/june272010/marijuana-infants-sc.php This is a great example
of information the drug war prohibitionists suppress every way they can. If
babies are getting natural cannabis like substances in mother’s breast milk,
do you still believe marijuana is harmful at any age?

If you want a good look at how far the government will go to promote its
illegal anti-marijuana drug war promoting message read this:
http://www.salon.com/news/feature/2000/03/31/magazines

Protestant, Catholic and Jewish Clergy Speak Out Against The War On Drugs  
http://www.csdp.org/news/news/clergydvd.htm

WELL WORTH READING! Free online book: The Emperor Wears No Clothes  
http://www.jackherer.com/chapter01.html

Watch this documentary about marijuana curing cancer! There are 7 parts, watch
them all! http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pjhT9282-Tw

If you doubt marijuana is good medicine read: Granny Storm Crow’s List  
http://forum.grasscity.com/medical-marijuana/436257-granny-storm-crows-list-
july-2009-a.html  
It’s more like a library than a list!

The laws prohibiting marijuana are NOT a result of any harm from marijuana.
They are the result of racism, lies and greed. Read the well documented proof
of that and a lot more marijuana TRUTH in these two articles: “WHY IS
MARIJUANA ILLEGAL, Pete Guither” and “MARIJUANA AND HEMP THE UNTOLD STORY,
Thomas J. Bouril”, click the links to those articles on this webpage:  
Internet Explorer web browser: http://jsknow.angelfire.com/home  
All Other Browsers: http://jsknow.angelfire.com/index.html

Why should the government ONLY allow use of a nontoxic natural plant "after
exhausting all other options"? Why should a substance that is far SAFER than
aspirin ONLY be legal for those that have a serious ailment? Why should people
be forced to use FDA approved poisons instead of a far safer more effective
natural plant? Why should a plant that is SAFER than potatoes be regulated and
taxed as if it was as dangerous as alcohol? Eating a couple of raw potatoes
can give you a toxic reaction but marijuana is nontoxic. Why should people
have their kids taken away from them when nontoxic marijuana is found in their
home while tobacco is legal and if a baby was to eat even one tobacco
cigarette the nicotine in that 1 cigarette could be fatal?

Learn how and why marijuana became illegal, follow the money and it will all
make sense, then speak up and demand marijuana legalization!

  * Reply to jsknow
  * Quote jsknow

### Results of years of research.

Submitted by Anonymous on August 6, 2012 - 1:25pm

"I don’t think marijuana use actually causes people to develop problems serve
enough to impair their work and relationships."

It's nice that you "think" this, but it clearly demonstrates that you are
simply talking out your backside. My son, who is 16 years old, was introduced
to marijuana two or three years ago.It has completely changed him. He was kid
who was conscientious, considerate, intelligent and very expressive.After
three years of use he has become a different person. He lies to everyone. He
will tell you what he thinks you want to hear and then immediately engage in
his next high. He is manipulative. He has become rude. He takes things that
don't belong to him without asking. He picks on kids that he perceives as weak
and/or uncool. My son was NONE of these things until he was introduced to
marijuana use. The changes were gradual and remained in step with his
increases in use. He smokes almost every day now and even keeps a vial on a
lanyard around his neck for keeping his stash with him at all times. He is
headed for rehab. Your assertions that this plant is not harmful are nothing
more than your own wishful thinking. This "holy" plant turned my kid into an
a$$hole.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### With all due respect, but

Submitted by Anonymous on August 6, 2012 - 1:49pm

With all due respect, but your son is one example, and a very weak argument at
that. Perhaps the fact that he is 16-years-old and going through adolescent
development is the reason why he has become an "a$$hole". There are thousands
of middle aged-elderly marijuana users who have used the substance everyday
for their entire lives. Many of these individuals are not only responsible,
sincere, and respectful citizens, but they also maintain successful careers,
families, and contribute to their communities. I am sorry for your troubles
with your son, but please do your research before lashing out ignorant and
poorly educated insults. Thank you.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Bad Example

Submitted by Vida Starr on August 6, 2012 - 7:56pm

I don't think your son is a very good example. None of the issues you say that
your son has is even remotely tied to marijuana. In all honesty, it sounds
like your son is dealing with something emotionally (maybe even
psychologically)that is going unaddressed. Instead of scapegoating the
marijuana use, how about you talk to him and get to the real root of the
problem. Picking on kids, being rude and manipulative, stealing etc... are not
symptoms of marijuana use... Weed doesn't make you steal or lie. If he started
drinking wine, would you have drawn the conclusion that wine makes him steal
and lie? Probably not because that would be pretty illogical.

  * Reply to Vida Starr
  * Quote Vida Starr

### The only true test of your

Submitted by Dave on September 4, 2012 - 2:15pm

The only true test of your theory is to get your son to stop using for a
month. Offer him a motivational reward (like money) if he passes a drug test
after 40 days. If he changes and turns his life around, your theory may have
been correct. In any event, chances are he will not return to his old ways. If
he is still a jerk, you at least know you need to look elsewhere to help him.
It sounds like he needs help and it would be sad if you ignored other options
because you believe it is caused solely by his Pot use.

  * Reply to Dave
  * Quote Dave

### You are simply wrong

Submitted by Anonymous on November 12, 2013 - 4:54am

I had a very happy childhood, up until i started smoking (grade 8) I had
straight A's and was on three sports teams a year and was generally considered
a funny and nice kid.. Gradually my pot usage increased as the years went by..
I spent my summers in high school training basketball overseas and always came
back a much better player but during the school year even though I had enjoyed
some success I only got marginally better.. At the time I knew this was
because of smoking weed, I knew that it made me lazy.. Playing with the best
players in the city and touring the AAU circuit i was exposed to the best
competitive amateur basketball North America had to offer.. I saw how hard my
peers were working but I could never achieve that level of dedication because
WEED MAKES (SOME) PEOPLE LAZY! My goal was to get a scholarship and I had all
the physical gifts needed as well as the IQ and a knack for accuracy from long
range.. The best coaches in the city believed in me at a certain point, some
of the best players truly respected me.. One of the biggest mistakes I made
was staying in the city to "train" my last two highschool summers.. I ended up
partying a lot more than training and my addiction - still hiding from me -
became worse.. A student-athlete is a student first and my marks had become
abysmal.. no marks, no scholarship.. By the end of grade 12 it was obvious to
everyone in the basketball sphere that I was no longer a product, my
confidence on the court was shot and the same players I was once better than
were playing 25 min + a game while I watched from left bench.. It only fueled
my addiction, it was easier to rip a bowl and forget than to go to the gym and
train a sport (that deep down i still loved) that was making me miserable..
The summer after grade 12 I felt like a weight had been lifted off my
shoulders, I gave up on basketball.. My addiction to marijuana hit new heights
and I was fully immersed in the party pop culture.. Many fun nights, many
memories, many things to make you forget about your problems.. I didnt even
graduate, september rolls around and all my peers are going to University
while I convinced my parents to enroll me in a "private" school (pay for my
grades).. I attended the school with my best friend (who had a similar fate in
his amateur sports career and saw similar aspirations evaporate because of
weed).. We had learned nothing and smoked on a daily basis at that school and
had an awesome time while we somehow magically recieved 90+ avgs. The
following year I attended university to study chemical engineering (family of
engineers) but my weed habits that year reached feverish heights.. the stress
of school was something i was not mentally strong enough to handle and weed
was my escape route more than ever.. other than some occasional strong
performances on exams that i studied hard for, i had failed a lot.. by the end
of that year I was put on 1 year mandatory absence from the program.. when
that letter came in, once again just like with basketball i had said, "fuck it
all" and started to smoke even more weed just to forget my failures.. You see,
I have a certain image, tall, good-looking, model girlfriend, smart, funny,
etc.. (not to toot my own horn, i just know this to be somewhat true) I am
still waiting to get back into school and in my ethnic local community secrets
cannot exist, everyone knows my problems now.. but my circle of friends still
think i am studying engineering in my second year.. It is a horrible way to
live and i agree with the mother about her 16 year old.. weed made me very
manipulative and a compulsive liar.. let me correct that, as a kid I liked to
lie needlessly just to see if I can get away with it, I knew it was wrong but
I liked doing it.. Weed made it worse.. People who "know" me have this certain
idea of me and it just isn't the true me, only a few people can say they know
the real me.. Im not trying to say, "Weed made all my problems" because that
is not true, I made my problems by choosing to smoke weed.. Now I torture
myself with every decision I remember where instead of going to bed to wake up
and train i went out and abused my parents trust by getting high, instead of
going home to study I go to my friends apartment and rip bowls for 5 hours.. I
am the tool here, I now have nothing except my family and (amazing)
girlfriend.. I could be lightyears ahead of where I am (my brother is no
longer Mr. Brother but Dr. Brother, my sister is on a similar path) but
instead i am still very much struggling with weed addiction and in my basement
typing this reply because i feel a strong urge to protect any other youngster
from the same assumptions I heard about weed, the same assumptions you make..
FACT: teens make bad choices, FACT: teens may have an addictive personality (I
do) FACT: weed CAN be addictive.. You are simply wrong and I am sadly right..
I have seen similar cases in pot culture time and time again.. its a drug
thing and its sad that people profit from other people's demise.. but then
again, we in North America with our cars and tvs and refrigerators benefit
from the hunger and poverty of the rest of the world.. When there is demand,
someone will supply and people will get exploited, whether it be the consumer
or the labour and even the producer.. Capitalism at its finest, groups
strongly advocating for their own wants.. The kids want weed, I just hope they
realize they really don't want it before its too late

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### So, let me get this

Submitted by Mak Bird on March 21, 2014 - 7:19pm

So, let me get this straight... you're blaming WEED for making you a crappy
basketball player in 8th grade?.... HAHAHAHAHAHA... I literally LMAO after
reading this long ass story... That' got to be the dumbest reply I've heard on
here. HAHAHAHA... what did you think weed was gonna make you a BETTER
Basketball player???

Do you have any idea how many PROFESSIONAL ATHLETES smoke weed?... Some of
them even smoke RIGHT before the game!

  * Reply to Mak Bird
  * Quote Mak Bird

### You made your own choice to

Submitted by Anonymous on June 6, 2014 - 6:12pm

You made your own choice to smoke. Your novel is irrelevant. You could say the
same for tobacco. Haha. Go away.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### You made your own choice to

Submitted by Anonymous on June 6, 2014 - 6:12pm

You made your own choice to smoke. Your novel is irrelevant. You could say the
same for tobacco. Haha. Go away.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### You aren't any good at

Submitted by Anonymous on June 6, 2014 - 6:24pm

You aren't any good at basketball because you smoked pot? Yeah, it's physical
work. Don't smoke. Your choice. Tobacco will hinder you the same way.You will
be lousy with either.

No good at homework because you're essentially taking medication that you
aren't compatible with? Should've chosen adderall to focus "10%"er. Your
choice. Pot can be medicinal. You abused it.

I don't smoke pot. I'm just saying that you were a failure and abused
something readily available to you at the times you needed to be sober. Blame
alcohol next time you screw up because that's what your drug of choice is at
the time.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Sounds like a symptom, not a

Submitted by Anonymous on October 25, 2012 - 12:23pm

Sounds like a symptom, not a cause.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### person to person

Submitted by Anonymous on May 27, 2013 - 10:22pm

cannabis use has actually improved my morals, though it very much depends on
the person.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Cannabis

Submitted by Elizabeth on January 3, 2014 - 10:10pm

It has improved your morals, by breaking the law and smoking an illegal
substance----what a crock!!

  * Reply to Elizabeth
  * Quote Elizabeth

### I totally agree. If you say

Submitted by Anonymous on September 2, 2013 - 10:04pm

I totally agree. If you say it isn't addictive you are as blind as you are
dumb. I'm dealing with the same thing with my teenager. Same personality. One
thing I haven't seen discussed is someone that is predisposed with medical
problems.. Mine has ADHD/ADD. YES it is addictive and yes it is harmful!

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### You know nothing

Submitted by Mak Bird on March 21, 2014 - 7:08pm

The subject of your comment says "Results of years of research"... So, madame,
how does watching your 16 year old son for a couple of years qualify as "years
of research". I've been eating cheeseburgers since I was about 3. So, does
that mean I was doing research on cheeseburgers??? Kill yourself immediately.

Maybe your son is bummed out because his mom is such a dolt.

  * Reply to Mak Bird
  * Quote Mak Bird

### Disagree

Submitted by Anonymous on November 28, 2012 - 4:19pm

First, sorry to be biting your head off. This is a relatively emotional topic
for reasons you will read below. Also, the amount of small-mindedness people
adopt when looking into the issues of marijuana is irritating. Don't

I can't speak for a 16 year old kid. What I can speak to though is that I am
turning 30 in 2 months time. I have been smoking everyday pretty much for the
past 5 years (have been smoking much longer, but have taken breaks for years
at a time beforehand because I struggled with finding a middle-ground) with
the exception of a 1 year break between mid-2011 and mid-2012. The reason for
stopping was because it was ruining my life. And i didn't stop straight away.
I spent 3 years spending all my "what-could-have-been-savings" on weed
(smoking about 1 gram of chronic a day). I lost a lot of friends in the
process because I became a recluse, stood still in my life (career didn't move
forward, no new relationships), I was depressed, I knew that smoking was not
moving my life forward in any way yet I found myself terrified at the thought
of stopping smoking.

Anyway, in the year I stopped, after about 3 months I started finding the
world interesting again. I started loving the mountains, rock climbing, being
around people, being active and I started building relationships again. I then
started smoking again about 6 months ago and I got straight back into the full
time thing. My work has gone to shit over the past 6 months, my interests have
dwindled impressively, and I find now that any activity I do is forced (oh,
and the savings I had accumulated during the year of not smoking has started
to be eroded) and have started falling back into depression. I have tried to
stop probably 10 times since I started again yet for some reason I find myself
going back to it (much like an addict would no?).

Anyway, one thing I have learned (admittedly I'm a smart guy so this may not
make sense to some of you) is that people are different. And, at the same
time, many people are the same. Hence, I believe that I am not alone
(considering I have met many people through my smoking career that have been
desperate to stop yet couldn't) and so that would suggest that many other
people are, like me, addicted to marijuana.

I do appreciate though that many many people do not get addicted to the drug.
But please, try not to be so publicly ignorant when you state that marijuana
addiction is not real. You are welcome to argue with me and tell me I am not
addicted. You would be wrong though. You clearly are not even assuming that
you understand an addicts point of view, in which case, why are you even
participating in the conversation. You are not doing it for the learning it
seems...

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### I agree with your post. In

Submitted by Anonymous on June 18, 2013 - 6:25pm

I agree with your post. In my teens, I became daily user, and became a young
adult smoking marijuana daily. I didn't quit until well into my 30's and
realized later (when I quit) that smoking marijuana daily kept me in a state
of depression. I am an introverted person and marijuana made me more
withdrawn. Sure, I had some sort of social life based upon smoking, but when I
quit, I had few friends because those friends I had when I was smoking, I knew
only superficially and our relationship was based around pot culture (smoking
pot, obtaining pot, etc). I wonder now what my 20's would've been like had I
had real friends and not "pot friends." To make matters worse, I barely
remember my 20's and that time almost feels like "lost time." These days when
I smoke again, it tends to make me feel more withdrawn and I can tell it makes
me slightly depressed. Of course, I sometimes think of smoking when I have to
do hard labor or exercise, but the mental repercussions aren't worth it. Now
that I'm not feeling depressed, I prefer to feel all of life.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Depressed

Submitted by Tomas on March 9, 2016 - 5:55pm

I've been introverted and depressed most of my life and have never used
cannabis or nicotine. I drink moderately.

What can I blame my less than stellar life on?

  * Reply to Tomas
  * Quote Tomas

### Just a regular Joe

Submitted by Anonymous on August 8, 2013 - 11:53pm

I had smoked pot for many years until about 5 years ago when it became
difficult to get and I have met and known at least a couple hundred people
that have smoked recreational pot for many years on and off. I have yet to see
any of them addicted. Many of them have easily quit with no withdrawal
symptoms that I am aware of. Most of them have become outstanding and
productive citizens. Many of them still smoke recreational pot. I have talked
to many of them about the possibility of addiction and we all tend to agree
that they are not addicted and have stopped many times without any withdrawal
symptoms. As far as draining the bank account that is certainly a problem but
not because of the pot but instead of the fact that it is illegal which has
driven the price through the roof. If you spend all of your money on pot then
I would expect you would become depressed and reclusive. That is not the
effect of pot but the result of our irrational laws making it illegal. After a
hard weeks work I find it much more relaxing to smoke a joint in my own home
not bothering anybody else instead of drinking alcohol and going out and
killing somebody or suffering a terrible headache the next morning and
possibly becoming addicted. I do not recommend that pot be smoked before going
to work and depending on the THC/CBD ratio which will determine if the pot is
hyper or sleeper it could have a impact on performance. Also, the more one
smokes pot the less effect it has. If I have not smoked for a week or longer
then I can get a pretty good buzz when I smoke again but if I continue to
smoke the next day and so on then the high is considerably reduced and
ineffective. Also, pot is the only drug that I have found that actually
remedies my restless leg syndrome at night and I have tried all sorts of
prescription and over-the-counter remedies to no effect.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Excuses, excuses

Submitted by Anonymous on August 9, 2013 - 1:41pm

I do not think that everyone is saying marijuana is not addictive but instead
pointing out that it is a very, VERY small percentage of users that supposedly
become addicted. There are clinical case studies and real world case studies
which I fall into the later. I know of at least a couple hundred marijuana
users over the past 60 years of personal use and not one of them has become
addicted ever. Not one of them has suffered any sort of negative affects. The
only reason that any of them have been incarcerated or not been employed
lucratively is because of the illegality and not effects of cannabis in
itself. It's time to wake up and smell the pot and stop using it has an excuse
for your failures.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### It's weird that you say you

Submitted by Mak Bird on March 21, 2014 - 7:13pm

It's weird that you say you enjoyed things more OFF weed... cause I happen to
enjoy things more while I'm SKY HIGH... as a matter of fact, when I'm out
having fun and I'm not high... the first thing I think is "You know what would
make this even more fun... WEED"

P.S. Before you point that dirty finger of yours and call me a dumb stoner...
I'm actually a COMPUTER GENIUS that creates apps and I'm RICH... I probably
make more money in 1 month then you make in a whole year

  * Reply to Mak Bird
  * Quote Mak Bird

### OWWW

Submitted by Johnnnycakes on August 9, 2015 - 3:06pm

Wow you are rich off of aps. Good job. What relevance does your worth have on
the subject? LOL  
I know this post is over a year old but I laughed at this one. Thanks

  * Reply to Johnnnycakes
  * Quote Johnnnycakes

### thank you

Submitted by Anonymous on April 9, 2017 - 12:04pm

thank you for you heartfelt remarks on how recreational use was for you. i am
struggling now with leaving a man i had fallen in love with at a time he was
not smoking weed. After 2 years he started using again, a little at first and
after 2 more years to 24/7. hit after hit off that pipe. i do not partake. i
lost him. he withdrew into himself. what hurts is he thinks he is the same.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Thanks jsknow

Submitted by Anonymous on December 8, 2010 - 10:11pm

Well said Jsknow. I have a friend who tokes upwards of 10 times a day with an
average of 5 times a day. Did I mention he has been doing this for 3
years...every day? He's doing well, has a 3.6GPA (3rd year of college), and
everyone he knows (including myself for a while) has no idea he's a regular
smoker. Despite his dependency, he is just another good citizen. So I ask you,
what harm comes from being a regular smoker? For that matter, if you're
addicted to a substance but it harms you in no way and has no negative impact
on your life what is the problem? Does addiction always have to be a problem?

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Marijuana Addiction

Submitted by Andrew Suber on February 27, 2011 - 8:28pm

American pot wasn't as strong in the 60s and 70s because we didn't have
traditional cultivation techniques and the strong varietals that you would
encounter in Thailand, South Africa or India. The most potent blossoms
presently would yield about 15-17% THC. My guess is that the best marijuana
grown at that time would be the same.

Law enforcement is using scare tactics to demonize marijuana. It is not that
much more potent now. The main advantage to growing hydroponically, for
instance, is not the potency but the speed at which the plant grows when given
optimal nutrition.

I have been using marijuana since my teenage years. In part, I was medicating
a undiagnosed chronic unipolar depression. In my opinion, it had a neutral to
slightly negative impact on my depression. Television, caffeine, poor diet, a
sedentary lifestyle, alcohol, video games had a much more negative impact.

If you do use marijuana, use it in moderation. Don't use it as a crutch for
your emotional problems. The real problem is that our culture provides a
thousand crutches for the inevitable pain we encounter in life.

I use marijuana in such small amounts now that I don't think it alters my
'mind' but rather adjusts my mood, appetite and nausea to the same extent as a
cup of coffee or a cigar. I use a vaporizer rather than smoking. I do think
smoking anything is unhealthy.

  * Reply to Andrew Suber
  * Quote Andrew Suber

### Pot being stronger today

Submitted by Anonymous on May 5, 2011 - 11:09am

Pot is probably stronger now because growing it has become more scientific.
Its not just throwing a couple seeds in the ground and coming back months
later to some nice pot. Certain lighting, dampness, and mixtures of different
types of weed make a strong or weak plant. Growers are combining different
marijuana strains to make new, stronger strains. Each year there is a
competition in Amsterdam called the Cannabis Cup in which judges from all
around the world can sample and vote for their favorite new strain. =]

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Reefer Madness

Submitted by Vida Starr on June 30, 2011 - 11:02am

THe article is decent. I really don't see how anyone came to the conclusion
that pot was introduced in the 1960s by vietnam vets. The weed propaganda
began much earlier than that. "Reefer Madness" was released in 1936. If pot
hadn't been introduced yet, then how could they have known to make a movie
about it? Just sayin...

Jsknow pretty much hit the nail on the head tho.

  * Reply to Vida Starr
  * Quote Vida Starr

### It is all too often that I

Submitted by Lucas Cole on September 20, 2011 - 1:58am

It is all too often that I hear people lay the claim that our understanding of
genetics has so drastically improved that today's marijuana is undeniably
stronger than it was twenty years ago. Frankly, this is rather hard to
swallow. The fact of the matter is that there are records of
recreational/medicinal marijuana use dating back as far as 2700 BCE, which
means that the plant has been domesticated for nearly five thousand years (if
not more). Furthermore, it grows very rapidly (approximately four months);
just think about how much more information we have on evolution by studying
microorganisms, as opposed to multi-cellular organisms. Why is this? It's
simply because microorganisms have such short lifespans that we are able to
witness evolution within a single lifetime. The same principle applies to
marijuana: five thousand years, with about three harvests per year, means that
human beings have had a LOT of time to figure out how to properly grow it.
With this said, the notion that THC levels have magically tripled within the
past twenty years borders on absurdity.  
The reason that this urban legend is so popular is because it's something that
both aficionados and prohibitionists of marijuana like to cite.
Prohibitionists want to scare everyone into thinking that using marijuana
today can/will lead to psychological problems that history is yet to
encounter. Meanwhile, aficionados are so sucked up into the marijuana
subculture that they like to think they are getting their hands on the best
stuff around.  
Maybe if someone encounters a strain called, "Monsanto Mary-Jane," then I will
consider revoking everything I just wrote.

  * Reply to Lucas Cole
  * Quote Lucas Cole

### Add new comment | Psychology Today

Submitted by new balance pas cher femme on April 7, 2015 - 6:38pm

Choisi plutot des mizuno.

  * Reply to new balance pas cher femme
  * Quote new balance pas cher femme

### THC/ CBD/ CBN levels

Submitted by Julia Simmone on November 22, 2011 - 10:40pm

well the technology has advanced a lot since the 70's but it all depends on
the way it is grown and certain strains are known to have higher levels of
certain cannabinoids ..... I personally prefer higher cbd levels because they
help with my muscle disorders...... but i always enjoy a nice high thc content
....... but the way that they test the different levels and cannabinoid ratios
is with gas chromatography

Cannabinoids have been tested in the past using different methods (HPLC, TLC,
GC) and the aim has always been to identify quantities of different
cannabinoids inside the cannabis resin. Gas chromatography (GC) is a type of
chromatography in which the mobile phase is a carrier gas, usually an inert
gas such as helium or an unreactive gas such as nitrogen, and the stationary
phase is a microscopic layer of liquid or polymer on an inert solid support,
inside a glass column. With gas chromatography the solutions travel through
the column in a gas state. The interactions of these gases reacts with the
walls of the column (coated by different stationary phases) and causes
different compounds to isolate. The main active components in cannabis resin
(THC, CBD and CBN) have been analyzed through the years, but now other
cannabinoids are proving very interesting for medicinal users. So we decided
to extend the testing to include the CBG, a cannabinoid used in many medicinal
tests all over the globe. Cannabigerol, also known as CBG, is a non-
psychoactive cannabinoid found in many strains at various concentrations. CBG
is mostly useful to lower blood pressure and to alleviate glaucoma, but it is
too early to rule out other beneficial effects.  
http://www.francogrow.com/web2/pages/grow-area/the-green-house-test-
revolution.php

but its all in the way you grow it..... yes certain strains might be more
likely to be higher in CBD such as indica strains ..... its all in the say you
grow and the time of harvest ..... a microscope and a good eye that knows the
right time to pull can succeed in getting a high cbd strain .... oh and the
drying and curing process has a lot to due with it..... the amount of light it
gets the longer its cured all depends on the cannabinoid ratios/ levels

  * Reply to Julia Simmone
  * Quote Julia Simmone

### Smoking weed

Submitted by pennyo on January 11, 2012 - 10:43pm

I don't know if you become addicted to weed physically or emotionally however
all you who think it should be legal and nothing is wrong with it are crazy.
My brother was a daily weed smoker until he dropped out of high school, lost
his car, his home, job and his relationships. My Mom was sure he was headed to
jail until he met a woman that was important enough for him to quit. After
quiting he got his GED, great job and then started his own company and he's an
all around great person. His personality has changed so much since he quit. My
niece smoked weed through high school and then went onto meth. She spent a
Christmas in rehab away from her 4 year old son. She too lost her job, was in
financial ruin and almost lost her son before she stopped and she would tell
you going back to weed would be the beginning of a relasp. I worked with a
girl that went to lunch and got high everyday. She of course was fired...her
work, time missed at work and attitude showed her weed abuse. I saw her
bartending after she was fired, what a waste. I work at a manufacturing
company and we had a girl lose 2 fingers in a machine...the company always
makes you take a drug test after an accident and she tested positive for weed
of course she was fired. Another niece was married with 2 children and her
husband got into weed...they are now divorced, he lost his business, rarely
see's his kids, lives at his Dad's and spent Thanksgiving in jail. We just had
an local situation that a few high school girls were getting high in a her car
in a parking lot, when a police office approched the car she paniced and tried
to drive off...she hit the police officer and then a high speed chase. This 17
year old is being tried as an adult. Almost all good companies require you to
pass a drug test for employment. My bosses daughter wasn't able to get a job
at her college coffee shop or the local HyVee so she's now working at Taco
Bell. She was in a car accident and they found weed in the car, after testing
positive she was given a DYI and possesion charge. Her life at only 20 is a
mess because she can't stop smoking weed. This drug affects so many people in
a negative way and for anyone to make young people rationalize a life
destructive drug is irresponsible. Young people need to know how it will
affect their lives in a negative way not hear how there is nothing wrong with
it. People can deal with life without numbing their mind with drugs...in fact
life is pretty amazing when you're clear and not dealing with the consquences
drugs will bring. Please stop saying nothing is wrong with smoking weed...this
drugs brings grave consequences to so many people.

  * Reply to pennyo
  * Quote pennyo

### um wtf?

Submitted by Anonymous on January 12, 2012 - 12:07pm

For every sob story you give and some how connected these ppl's problems to
weed (And you really were stretching that)I could give you 10 ppl who smoked
weed and live normal healthy lives. I could also make an argument against
video games because there are ppl who are addicted to video games. So Addicted
they lose their jobs and family. Does that mean video games should be illegal?
You apparently surround yourself with losers if all these ppl ruined their
lives from smoking weed. My brother is a very successful entrepreneur and
smokes weed. My mother is a corporate lawyer and smokes weed. Most of my
friends have great jobs, great homes, great families.... and they smoke weed.

Also some of your stories help to prove why marijuana should be legal. The
girl who panicked when the cop came wouldn't have panicked if weed were legal.
Companies couldn't deny employment to people who smoke weed... and they won't
have to work at Taco Bell.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### You can become addicted to

Submitted by Anonymous on January 15, 2012 - 10:11pm

You can become addicted to anything- food, nasal spray, Tylenol, cigarettes,
alcohol, etc. Does that mean that all of those things should be illegal? No.
People die every year from snorting paint and swallowing drain cleaner. Does
that mean we should stop painting our buildings and cleaning our kitchens? No.

I'm very sorry for the bad life experiences your loved ones had to go through,
but they are the only ones to blame. Yes, they were pot smokers, however, that
wasn't caused their downfalls. It was their own individual personalities and
genes that caused your brother to lack the motivation to finish high school or
your sister to lack the self control to say no to meth. As for their criminal
struggles, those are only existent because of people like you: people who
blindly stigmatize marijuana on the basis of popular culture. You have never
conducted nor researched a study on its actual effects on the human body.

Please, save us all your sob stories and do something productive. Make our
society a better place by educating yourself and refraining from spreading
bullshit.

Thank you.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Pot is not safe

Submitted by Anonymous on December 11, 2012 - 4:38am

I am a healthcare provider in Humboldt County. Daily I hear stories from
people whose lives have been damaged by marijuana use. They always say they
thought pot addiction was a joke until they tried to quit. They have lost
relationships, jobs and self-esteem. They talk about how much better they feel
when they can quit for awhile, but they always go back to it and start having
the same problems again.

If pot helps pain, why do people smoke along with their pain meds? (oh wait, I
can answer that. Because they become cross-addicted to both.) If it helps
anxiety, why do people still have anxiety plus now they are paranoid?

This county has sold its soul to the devil over pot. It's sad to see young
people dropping out of college to go into "the business" only to find
themselves sad losers five years later with no future and no education,
hanging out with 45 year old sad losers.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### 45 year old sad loser?

Submitted by Anonymous on August 9, 2013 - 2:12pm

I am a health care provider as well and have been for over 40+ years. I
disagree with everything you say. I have never seen or experienced any of the
things that you talk about. I am a bit livid over your biased and judgmental
accusations. You are obviously misdiagnosing your patients and incorrectly
demonizing and associating marijuana as the root cause when they obviously
have other more serious psychological and medical issues. Everything you use
to substantiate your argument is hearsay and biased conjecture. If I were to
believe everything that many of my patients said then pigs would be flying and
the moon would be made of cheese.

BTW, this "45 year old sad loser" has managed to own and operate a
multimillion dollar business and contribute substantially to various charities
including the local health care facilities. I find pot much safer, effective,
and more enjoyable than alcohol and prescription pills. Oh, and I do not
believe in the devil either.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### So defensive? You do know

Submitted by Anonymous on December 26, 2013 - 7:25pm

So defensive? You do know that you ONE experience does NOT invalidate his
observation of multiple patients?

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### Those 3rd party observations

Submitted by Anonymous on January 2, 2014 - 4:34pm

Those 3rd party observations don't make it fact either. Please show me proof
that Marijuana was the root cause of the problem for these patients. Just
because they are smoking weed when they have major life issues doesn't mean
that the weed is the problem. Thats like saying a bank robber robbed the bank
because they drove a car to get there and that cars cause people to rob banks
not people...

People may turn to weed when they have problems as a way to cope and ease
their pain but it doesn't mean that marijuana is what caused the problem.
People have issues that they need to work out and cover them up doesn't make
them better. I don't think think there is any problem with marijuana use as
long as you don't use it to cover up the real problems you're having. Don't
blame a plant, it didn't do it, you did.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

### I'm addicted to pot

Submitted by T13 on February 6, 2015 - 11:53pm

I'm addicted to pot, I tell myself I am going to quit every day yet I always
smoke more. Been smoking for 12 years and telling myself I am going to quit
for about 10 years. Anyone who says pot is not addictive is an idiot. I have
many friends who smoke pot and are addicted to it too.

  * Reply to T13
  * Quote T13

### Wrong end of the horse?

Submitted by Anonymous on August 9, 2013 - 12:08am

From what you are saying it is because of the pot that they all had problems.
Is it possible that the problems were because pot is illegal? Not getting a
job for fear of failing a drug test or running from the police because you
have pot is not a symptom of pot itself but because we have managed to vilify
it and make it illegal. I think you are sitting on your high horse backwards.

  * Reply to Anonymous
  * Quote Anonymous

  * Previous

  * Page 1 (current)
  * Next

## Post Comment

Your name

E-mail

The content of this field is kept private and will not be shown publicly.

Subject

Comment *

Notify me when new comments are posted

All comments __

Replies to my comment __

Leave this field blank

advertisement

### About the Author

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/profile_bottom/public/authors/jann_gumbiner.jpg?itok=8rhWkrGu)

**Jann Gumbiner, Ph.D.** , is a licensed psychologist and clinical professor
at the University of California, Irvine College of Medicine.

In Print:

Adolescent Assessment: Identifying Developmental, Psychological, and
Behavioral Issues

View Author Profile

View Author Profile

### More Posts

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2017-10/athena-144x144-4_143-1090_1090.jpg?itok=eRrgAtKc)

## Communicating With Your Dog

Dog training is about listening more than issuing commands.

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/Jew_1_0_0.png?itok=CTM94wL7)

## "Us" and "Them"

Some observations from Social Psychology.

![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/essentials_thumb/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/Kids%20and%20Money_1_0.gif?itok=ocEiWPl5)

## Money Management Skills for Children

Even very young children can count pennies and exchange them for purchases.

Continue Reading

advertisement

## Most Popular

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/caleb-george-144975-unsplash-144x144-0_274-3024_3024_0.jpg?itok=pZQjXA94)

Four Ways to Cope with Stress You Likely Haven't Thought Of

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-03/hydrologic_cycle_by_sixth-grade_daughter_of_christopher_bergland-144x144-1032_0-936_937.jpg?itok=YjAdwcni)

Arts-Integrated Pedagogy May Enhance Academic Learning

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/bite_risk_tease-144x144-173_63-588_588.jpg?itok=-BCzrVTM)

Dog Breeds That Pose the Highest Risk of Hurting Children

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-05/sebastian_kaulitzk_medically_accurate_illustration_of_vagus_nerve_gut-brain_axis-144x144-0_0-750_750_0.jpg?itok=Fqgj60gq)

Longer Exhalations Are an Easy Way to Hack Your Vagus Nerve

  * ![](https://cdn.psychologytoday.com/sites/default/files/styles/thumbnail_75x75/public/field_blog_entry_teaser_image/2019-06/pixnio-212127-725x483-144x144-45_0-484_483.jpg?itok=NiBddQqW)

There's No "I" in Love

advertisement

## More Like This

  * Is Marijuana Addictive? Part 2 
  * Alcohol vs. marijuana in the brain
  * Which Is Worse for Your Health: Marijuana or Alcohol?
  * Marijuana, Sleep and Dreams
  * Does Marijuana Impair Cognition? Implications for Prop 19

## Find a Therapist

Get the help you need from a therapist near you–a FREE service from Psychology
Today.

### Cities:

  * Atlanta, GA
  * Austin, TX
  * Baltimore, MD
  * Boston, MA
  * Brooklyn, NY
  * Charlotte, NC
  * Chicago, IL
  * Columbus, OH
  * Dallas, TX
  * Denver, CO
  * Detroit, MI
  * Houston, TX
  * Indianapolis, IN
  * Jacksonville, FL
  * Las Vegas, NV
  * Los Angeles, CA
  * Louisville, KY
  * Memphis, TN
  * Miami, FL
  * Milwaukee, WI
  * Minneapolis, MN
  * Nashville, TN
  * New York, NY
  * Oakland, CA
  * Omaha, NE
  * Philadelphia, PA
  * Phoenix, AZ
  * Pittsburgh, PA
  * Portland, OR
  * Raleigh, NC
  * Sacramento, CA
  * Saint Louis, MO
  * San Antonio, TX
  * San Diego, CA
  * San Francisco, CA
  * San Jose, CA
  * Seattle, WA
  * Tucson, AZ
  * Washington, DC

Are you a Therapist?

Get Listed Today

Psychology Today

![Facebook](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-facebook.svg)

![Twitter](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-twitter.svg)

![Instagram](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/logos/logo-instagram.svg)

## Recent Issues

  *     *       *         *           *             * 

Subscribe Today!

  * About
  * Privacy
  * Terms

United States ![](/sites/all/themes/pt_brand/assets/actions/country-switcher-

body.svg) v

  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Canada
  * Denmark
  * International
  * Ireland
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

Psychology Today (C) 2019 Sussex Publishers, LLC

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

