

  * News in Brief

  * Economics

  * Education

  * Environment

  * Social Justice

  * Features & Investigations

  * Ideas

  * Audio

  * Newsletter

  * _About_

  * _Impact_
  * _Contact_
  * _Pitching_
  * _Careers_
  * _Partnerships_
  * _Terms of Use_
  * _Email Newsletter_
  * _Platform Privacy_
  * _Privacy Settings_

  *     *       *         *   * ![Logo](https://psmag.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTQ2MTgzMzA3OTc1OTkyODY0/navbar.png)

  * News in Brief
  * Economics
  * Education
  * Environment
  * Social Justice
  * Features & Investigations
  * Ideas
  * Audio
  * Newsletter

  *     *       *         *   * Log In

![](https://psmag.com/.image/c_fit%2Ccs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_700/MTQ2NzYyMDc3MDk5MjcxOTc5/large.png)

  * ![Logo](https://psmag.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTQ2MTgzMzA3OTc1OTkyODY0/navbar.png)
  * News in Brief
  * Economics
  * Education
  * Environment
  * Social Justice
  * Features & Investigations
  * Ideas
  * Audio
  * Newsletter

  * Home

  * Social Justice

  * Lands of Metamorphosis

  * Taking Freedom
  * Tomando La Libertad

# One Hundred Years Ago, Prohibition Began in Earnest—and We’re Still Paying

for It

On December 17, 1914, Congress passed the Harrison Act, making non-medical
opium and cocaine illegal. It was really about punishment, not public health.
And it set the tone for a disastrous century.

Author:

    
    
    Maia Szalavitz
    

Publish date:

    
    
    Jan 2, 2015
    

Updated on

    
    
    Jun 14, 2017
    

  *     *       *         * 

![Orange County, California, sheriff's deputies dumping illegal alcohol, 1932.

\(Photo: Orange County Archives/Wikimedia

Commons\)](https://psmag.com/.image/t_share/MTI3NTgyNTgyMjc0NTYyNTI2/prohibition-

alcohol.jpg)

Orange County, California, sheriff's deputies dumping illegal alcohol, 1932.
(Photo: Orange County Archives/Wikimedia Commons)

Federal drug prohibition started in earnest 100 years ago, with the passage of
the 1914 Harrison Narcotics Tax Act. While on its face, the law appeared to
tax and regulate opium and cocaine, it was intended--and enforced--as an
absolute ban on the non-medical use and sale of these drugs (and their
derivatives) as well as on maintenance prescribing to addicted people.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

It was the opening salvo--soon followed by our short, violent, and crimogenic
ban on alcohol--in what seemed until very recently to be an ever-escalating
"war" on most other drugs. While prohibition was often said, and even
believed, by many to be a fight to improve public health, it wound up
subjecting those it claimed to want to help to an illegal market, prison,
torturous treatments, and even the deliberate poisoning of alcohol supplies by
the government, which is believed to have killed up to 10,000 people. Today,
thanks in part to the legacy of the Harrison Act, we are the world's most
prolific jailer, with five percent of the world's population and 25 percent of
its prisoners. And we also remain among the most avid consumers of drugs.

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

ADVERTISEMENT

Thanks for watching!Visit Website

### "Most of the attacks upon white women of the South are the direct result

of the cocaine-crazed Negro brain," testified one doctor, in congressional
hearings aimed at drumming up support for the proposed act.

So what have we learned from a century of drug prohibition? First, that our
drug laws began in racism and continue to reflect its corrosive influence.
Let's look at what led up to the passage of the act, during a period of
American history that has been described by Yale historian David Musto as "the
peak of lynchings, legal segregation and voting laws designed to remove
political and social power" from African Americans.

The public health motivations behind the Harrison Act were murky, at best. By
contrast, the very first national drug regulation law, the Pure Food and Drug
Act of 1906, required products to disclose their ingredients and was clearly
designed to protect consumers. Before opiates were prohibited, simple labeling
had already cut their sales by a third.

There were certainly concerns about addiction linked to over-the-counter sale
of drugs like cocaine and opium--but this was not the focus of the debate over
the law. In the early 1900s, the typical opiate addict was a white housewife
who bought her drugs ostensibly as medicine, and yet the media spotlight
mainly fell on black and Chinese men.

"Most of the attacks upon white women of the South are the direct result of
the cocaine-crazed Negro brain," testified one doctor, in congressional
hearings aimed at drumming up support for the proposed law. A 1908 feature
from the _New York Times_ was headlined "The Growing Menace of the Use of
Cocaine." It stated that cocaine is "the most insidious of known narcotics--a
drug that wrecks its victim more swiftly and surely than opium."

The same article also claimed:

> The use of coke is probably much more widely spread among Negroes than among
whites. Heaven dust, they call it. Its use by Negro field hands in the South
has spread with appalling swiftness and results. There is very little doubt
that every Jew peddler in the South carries the stuff, although many states
have lately made its sale a felony.

And a 1905 _Times_story, headlined "Negro Cocaine Evil," quoted a Memphis
judge who claimed that "the evils attendant upon the use of the drug ... cover
the whole catalogue of crime."

A constant diet of this type of coverage increased support for state and
federal prohibition laws, although statistics did not show heavier use of
cocaine by blacks compared to whites.

But it wasn 't just blacks and Jews who were the objects of this prejudice:
Fear and hatred of the Chinese workers who built the transcontinental
railroads and were later seen as threats to American workers also played a
role. Journalists and editors stoked fears that opium allowed or encouraged
"Chinamen" to rape or seduce white women. Indeed, the same doctor who
testified to Congress that cocaine led blacks to sexually assault white women
also told the legislators and press that, "In Chinatown, in the city of
Philadelphia, there are enormous quantities of opium consumed and it is quite
common, gentlemen, for these Chinese, or 'Chinks' as they are called, to have
as a concubine, a white woman."

Clearly, our anti-drug laws were not then--and are not now--based on science.
What's worse, their racist impact remains considerable. Michelle Alexander
notes in _The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness_
that biased enforcement of drug laws means that more black men are under
criminal justice supervision today than were enslaved in 1850. And although
blacks and whites use and deal drugs at comparable rates, African-American men
are sent to prison for drug crimes at a rate that is 10 times higher,
according to the NAACP. As Alexander puts it, "[W]e have not ended racial
caste in America; we have merely redesigned it."

Another lesson of the Harrison Act involves the media: It was --and remains--
too credulous about non-scientific claims made about drugs and too willing to
spread stereotypes and propaganda. Over the past century, if the _Times_ and
other publications had simply searched their own archives during each new wave
of drug panic, they would have found repeated instances of different drugs
alternately being called the "most addictive" ever (or not), depending on
whether there was a current crusade against them, rather than on new
comparative medical evidence.

### The crack "crisis" was marked by the same hysteria, and sometimes even the

same language, as the panic that led to the Harrison Act--and included
similarly racist insinuations.

During the 1970s, they could have questioned their heroin coverage by looking
at how cocaine was said to be worse than opiates early in the 1900s; during
the 1980s, they could have looked at why the then-devil-drug cocaine was once
again trumping the 1970s bad guy, heroin. They also could have focused on how
harsh drug sentences had repeatedly failed during previous bouts of drug-
related fear.

Instead, the _Times_ ran stories like "Crack Addiction: The Tragic Toll on
Women and Children" (1986) and a three-part front-page series, "The Crack
Plague" (1988). _Newswee_ k said crack caused "instantaneous addiction," and,
of course, was "rapidly spreading to the suburbs." Hundreds of similar stories
led up to the passage of tough mandatory minimum sentences for crack in 1986
and 1988, which still have not been completely repealed.

The crack "crisis" was marked by the same hysteria, and sometimes even the
same language, as the panic that led to the Harrison Act--and included
similarly racist albeit more veiled insinuations about the connections between
black people and drugs.

Now, however, it seems as though the fever may finally be breaking at last.
Four states and the District of Columbia have voted in the past few years to
legalize the recreational use of marijuana--and although Congress may prevent
D.C. from enacting its legalization, the same bill it passed to do so
simultaneously barred the DEA from using its funding to go after medical
marijuana users and sellers in the 23 states where it is now legal.

The state of California--in a ballot initiative that would have been
unthinkable in the 1980s or 1990s--just voted to _reduce_ penalties for
possession of cocaine and heroin, making it a misdemeanor, not a felony. And
President Obama has refused to crack down on the recreational marijuana
states, saying that he does not think marijuana is more dangerous than
alcohol.

Today, even the _Times_ has begun a campaign to legalize marijuana--although
it still hasn't cured itself entirely of hysterical drug coverage.

The final lesson of the Harrison Act is one of utter failure. We've tried
prohibition for a century. Since the 1980s, we've spent over a trillion
dollars on it, with an exponential increase in law enforcement spending and
incarceration rates since then. And what have we got to show for it, in terms
of the outcome people most want it to prevent?

Well, between 1980 and 1985, the first-ever large representative
epidemiological survey of the population was done to see how common various
mental illnesses including addictions were. It found that 6.1 percent of
Americans could be diagnosed with a substance use disorder linked to illegal
drugs.

The second time such a survey was done, between 2000 to 2005, the rate was
10.3 percent. Prohibition simply does not work.

If the media starts doing its job and informing us of the _true_ facts,
perhaps we won 't have to wait another hundred years to end the terrible
legacy of the Harrison Act.

_Thispost originally appeared on Substance, a_ Pacific Standard _partner site,
as "One Hundred Years Ago Today, Prohibition Began in Earnest. We're Still
Paying."_

Tags

terms:

    
    
    Substance
    

![Maia

Szalavitz](https://psmag.com/.image/c_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cg_face%2Ch_60%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_60/MTI3ODE2MDY1MDE4Mjk0MjQy/maia-

headshotjpg.jpg)

By

Maia Szalavitz

  *     *       *         * 

#

![Related](https://psmag.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTUzMDcyMjkxMTAwNTAwOTk5/section_header_art_xtrasmall_related.svg)

![12-step-

programs](https://psmag.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTI3NTgyNTE1NDM0Mjg3MDc0/12-step-

programs.jpg)

Social Justice

## What I’ve Finally Concluded About 12-Step Programs

Alcoholics Anonymous and the rest remain the biggest and most polarizing force
in the addiction community. I quit heroin and cocaine using the steps and have
covered addiction as a journalist—and I'd argue that the picture is decidedly
mixed.

![addiction-

learning](https://psmag.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTI3NTgyNDYzMDg5Mjg0Mzcw/addiction-

learning.jpg)

Social Justice

## Addiction Is a Learning Disorder

Addiction is not about our brains being "hijacked" by drugs or
experiences—it's about learned patterns of behavior. Our inability to
understand this leads to no end of absurdities.

![nyt-

building](https://psmag.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTI3NTgyNDY4NzI2NTgzMjY2/nyt-

building.jpg)

Social Justice

## The NYT Coverage of Other Drugs Still Doesn’t Cut It

The paper of record has finally backed marijuana legalization. Yet it
continues to fête drug warriors and stigmatize addiction.

![addiction-

recovery](https://psmag.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTI3NTgyNTcxMjY4ODExMzk1/addiction-

recovery.jpg)

Social Justice

## It’s Time to Reclaim the Word 'Recovery'

It's empowering to say publicly that you are in recovery from addiction. But
for some, recovery is a members-only club for people who are totally
abstinent. That leaves most of us out in the cold.

![digital-

drugs](https://psmag.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTI3NTgyNTcxMjY4OTA1NDM4/digital-

drugs.jpg)

Social Justice

## DIY Drugs and the Digital Future of Getting High

Journalist Mike Power broke the story of the drug revolution that the rest of
the media largely ignores—he even created a drug of his own to prove it. He
tells us how legal highs and the Internet are transforming use and challenging
policy.

![addiction-in-

usa](https://psmag.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTI3NTgyNDMzNTYxNjQ3NTgy/addiction-

in-usa.jpg)

Social Justice

## Addiction Is Different in America

Whether it's our drug use, our laws, or the treatment options we have on
offer, the U.S. frequently stands out. And that's not always something to
celebrate.

# ![Subscribe to our

Newsletter](https://psmag.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTUzMDcyMTY1NzQxMTQzMDQ3/section_header_art_xtrasmall_subscribe.svg)

Subscribe

  * About
  * Impact
  * Contact
  * Pitching
  * Careers
  * Partnerships
  * Terms of Use
  * Email Newsletter
  * Platform Privacy

(C) 2019 The Social Justice Foundation

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

