

# Unsafe abortion

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5e/RussianAbortionPoster.jpg/220px-

RussianAbortionPoster.jpg)

Soviet poster circa 1925. Title translation: "Abortions induced by grandma or
self-taught midwives not only maim the woman, they also often lead to death."

An **unsafe abortion** is the termination of a pregnancy by people lacking the
necessary skills, or in an environment lacking minimal medical standards, or
both.[1] An unsafe abortion is a life-threatening procedure. It includes self-
induced abortions, abortions in unhygienic conditions, and abortions performed
by a medical practitioner who does not provide appropriate post-abortion
attention.[2] About 25 million unsafe abortions occur a year, of which most
occur in the developing world.[3]

Unsafe abortions results in complications for about 7 million women a year.[3]
Unsafe abortions are also one of the leading causes of deaths during pregnancy
and childbirth (about 5-13% of all deaths during this period).[3] Most unsafe
abortions occur where abortion is illegal,[4] or in developing countries where
affordable and well-trained medical practitioners are not readily
available,[5][6] or where modern birth control is unavailable.[7]

Despite the assertions of some who oppose abortion, unsafe abortion was and is
a public health crisis.[8] More specifically, lack of access to safe abortion
was and is a public health risk.[8] The more restrictive the law, the higher
the rates of death and other complications.[8]

## Contents

        
                  * 1 Overview
          * 2 Conflating illegal and unsafe abortion
          * 3 Frequency by continent
            * 3.1 Abortion in the U.S. before 1973 (Roe v. Wade)
            * 3.2 Rates in the U.S. after 1973
          * 4 Methods
          * 5 Health risks
            * 5.1 Treatment of complications
          * 6 See also
          * 7 References
          * 8 External links
        

## Overview[edit]

The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that for the time period of
2010-14 there were 55.7 million abortions worldwide each year. Out of these
abortions, approximately 54% were safe, 31% were less safe, and 14% were least
safe. That means that 25 million (45%) abortions each year between 2010 and
2014 were unsafe, with 24 million (97%) of these in developing countries.[9]
In 2003 approximately 42 million pregnancies were voluntarily terminated, of
which 20 million were unsafe.[10] According to WHO and Guttmacher, at least
22,800[11] women die annually as a result of complications of unsafe abortion;
and between two million and seven million women each year survive unsafe
abortion but sustain long-term damage or disease (incomplete abortion,
infection (sepsis), bleeding, and injury to the internal organs, such as
puncturing or tearing of the uterus). They also concluded abortion is safer in
countries where it's legal, but dangerous in countries where it's outlawed and
performed clandestinely. The WHO reports that in developed regions, nearly all
abortions (92%) are safe, whereas in developing countries, more than half
(55%) are unsafe. According to WHO statistics, the risk rate for unsafe
abortion is 1/270; according to other sources, unsafe abortion is responsible
for at least 8% of maternal deaths.[12][11] Worldwide, 48% of all induced
abortions are unsafe. The British Medical Bulletin reported in 2003 that
70,000 women a year die from unsafe abortion.[13] Incidence of such abortions
may be difficult to measure because they can be reported variously as
miscarriage, "induced miscarriage", "menstrual regulation", "mini-abortion",
and "regulation of a delayed/suspended menstruation".[14][15]

An article pre-printed by the World Health Organization called safe, legal
abortion a "fundamental right of women, irrespective of where they live" and
unsafe abortion a "silent pandemic".[14] The article states "ending the silent
pandemic of unsafe abortion is an urgent public-health and human-rights
imperative." It also states "access to safe abortion improves women’s health,
and vice versa, as documented in Romania during the regime of President
Nicolae Ceaușescu" and "legalisation of abortion on request is a necessary but
insufficient step toward improving women’s health" citing that in some
countries, such as India where abortion has been legal for decades, access to
competent care remains restricted because of other barriers. WHO’s Global
Strategy on Reproductive Health, adopted by the World Health Assembly in May
2004, noted: "As a preventable cause of maternal mortality and morbidity,
unsafe abortion must be dealt with as part of the MDG on improving maternal
health and other international development goals and targets."[16] The WHO's
Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction (HRP), whose research
concerns people's sexual and reproductive health and lives,[17] has an overall
strategy to combat unsafe abortion that comprises four interrelated
activities:[16]

        
                  * to collate, synthesize and generate scientifically sound evidence on unsafe abortion prevalence and practices;
          * to develop improved technologies and implement interventions to make abortion safer;
          * to translate evidence into norms, tools and guidelines;
          * and to assist in the development of programmes and policies that reduce unsafe abortion and improve access to safe abortion and highquality postabortion care
        

A 2007 study published in _The Lancet_ found that, although the global rate of
abortion declined from 45.6 million in 1995 to 41.6 million in 2003, unsafe
procedures still accounted for 48% of all abortions performed in 2003. It also
concluded that, while the overall incidence of abortion in both developed and
developing countries is approximately equal, unsafe abortion occurs more often
in less-developed nations.[18]

According to a new study in _The Lancet_ that focused on data from 2010 to
2014, nearly 55 million pregnancies are terminated early and of that 55
million, nearly half, 25.5 million are deemed as unsafe.[19] The World Health
Organization and the Guttmacher Institute in New York, stresses the need for
access to a safe abortion for all women and that unsafe methods must be
replaced. Africa, Asia and Latin America account for almost 97 percent of them
of unsafe abortions. These regions are often poorer and underdeveloped and
lack the access to safe abortion methods. Out of all abortions in these
regions only 25% are considered safe. In developed countries these numbers
improve drastically. Nearly all abortions in North America (99%) are
considered safe. Overall nearly 88% of abortions in developed countries were
actually considered safe, with the number of safe abortions in Europe slightly
lower.

## Conflating illegal and unsafe abortion[edit]

Unsafe abortions often occur where abortion is illegal.[4] However, the
prevalence of unsafe abortion may also be determined by other factors, such as
whether it occurs in a developing country that has a low level of competent
medical care.[20]

Unsafe abortions sometimes occur where abortion is legal, and safe abortions
sometimes occur where abortion is illegal.[21] Legalization is not always
followed by elimination of unsafe abortion.[5][22] Affordable safe services
may be unavailable despite legality, and conversely, women may be able to
afford medically competent services despite illegality.[23]

When abortion is illegal, that generally contributes to the prevalence of
unsafe abortion, but it is not the only contributor. In addition, a lack of
access to safe and effective contraception contributes to unsafe abortion. It
has been estimated that the incidence of unsafe abortion could be reduced by
as much as 73% without any change in abortion laws if modern family planning
and maternal health services were readily available globally.[7]

Illegality of abortion contributes to maternal mortality, but that
contribution is not as great as it once was, due to medical advances including
penicillin and the birth control pill.[24]

## Frequency by continent[edit]

Region | Number of unsafe abortions (thousands) | Number of unsafe abortions
per 100 live births | Number of unsafe abortions per 1000 women  
---|---|---|---  
Africa | 4200 | 14 | 24  
Asia _| 10500 | 14 | 13  
Europe | 500 | 7 | 3  
Latin America and the Caribbean | 3700 | 32 | 29  
North America | Negligible incidence | Negligible incidence | Negligible
incidence  
Oceania **| 30 | 12 | 17  
** World **|** 19000 **|** 14 **|** 14_*

        
                 * Excluding Japan
        ** Excluding Australia and New Zealand
        

Source: WHO 2006[25]

### Abortion in the U.S. before 1973 (Roe v. Wade)[edit]

In 1973, the Supreme Court ruled 7–2 that laws prohibiting an abortion
violated a woman’s right to privacy. The landmark case, _Roe v. Wade_ ,
changed abortion in the United States.

Early abortion laws really only prohibited the use of toxic chemicals that
were used to cause a miscarriage.[26] The first such law was passed in
Connecticut in 1821.[26]

Prior to 1973, the authority to legalize abortion rested with the state
governments. Up through the 1960s 44 states had laws that outlawed abortions
unless the health of the pregnant patient was at stake.[27]

In the 1940s, records show that more than 1,000 women died each year from
abortions that were labeled as unsafe. Many of these abortions were self-
induced. Unsafe abortion practices were such a concern in the United States
that nearly every large hospital had some type of “septic abortion ward” that
was responsible for dealing with the complications that accompanied an
incomplete abortion. Incomplete abortions were the leading cause for OB-GYN
services across the United States.[28] In the 1960s, the National Opinion
Research Center found that hundreds of women were attempting to self-abort
with coat hangers, knitting needles and ballpoint pens, and by swallowing
toxic chemicals like bleach and laundry detergent.[28] However, the number of
deaths declined significantly into the 1960s and 1970s. The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention estimates that in 1972, 130,000 women attempted
self-induced abortions or obtained illegal abortions, resulting in 39
deaths.[29]

### Rates in the U.S. after 1973[edit]

In 2005, the _Detroit News_ reported that a 16-year-old boy beat his pregnant,
under-age girlfriend with a bat at her request to abort a fetus. The young
couple lived in Michigan, where parental consent is required to receive an
abortion.[30][31][32] In Indiana, where there are also parental consent laws,
a young woman by the name of Becky Bell died from an unsafe abortion rather
than discuss her pregnancy and wish for an abortion with her parents.[33][34]

In 2011, Kermit Gosnell, a licensed doctor who provided abortion services in
the American state of Pennsylvania, was indicted by a grand jury on murder
charges after a woman died in his clinic. The grand jury found that the
conditions in Gosnell's clinic were not only unsanitary and that Gosnell
staffed his clinic with unlicensed individuals, he had also commonly conducted
the lesser known practice of severing the spinal cords of newly born
babies.[35]

## Methods[edit]

Methods of unsafe abortion include:

        
                  * Trying to break the amniotic sac inside the womb with a sharp object or wire (for example an unbent wire clothes hanger or knitting needle). This method can cause infection or injury to internal organs (for example perforating the uterus or intestines), resulting in death.[36] The uterus softens during pregnancy and is very easy to pierce, so one traditional method was to use a large feather.[37]
          * Pumping toxic mixtures, such as chili peppers and chemicals like alum, Lysol, permanganate, or plant poison into the body of the woman. This method can cause the woman to go into toxic shock and die.[38]
          * Inducing an abortion without medical supervision by self-administering abortifacient over-the-counter drugs or drugs obtained illegally or by using drugs not indicated for abortion but known to result in miscarriage or uterine contraction. Drugs that cause uterine contractions include oxytocin (synthetic forms are Pitocin and Syntocinon), prostaglandins, and ergot alkaloids. Risks include uterine rupture, irregular heartbeat, a rise in blood pressure (hypertension), a drop in blood pressure (hypotension), anemia requiring transfusion, cardiovascular problems, pulmonary edema, and death, as well as intense bronchospasms in women with asthma.[39]
        

## Health risks[edit]

Unsafe abortion is a major cause of injury and death among women worldwide. It
is estimated that nearly 25 million unsafe abortions take place annually.[40]
Of this 25 million it is estimated that anywhere from 4.7% to 13.2% of
maternal deaths come from a direct result of unsafe abortion practices, which
disproportionately affect developing countries that lack safe abortion
practices.[41] 97% of these abortions take place in developing countries.[42]
Unsafe abortion is believed to result in at least 22,800 deaths and millions
of injuries annually.[42] The legal status of abortion is believed to play a
major role in the frequency of unsafe abortion.[43][44] For example, the 1996
legalization of abortion in South Africa had an immediate positive impact on
the frequency of abortion-related complications,[45] with abortion-related
deaths dropping by more than 90%.[46] Groups such as the World Health
Organization have advocated a public-health approach to addressing unsafe
abortion, emphasizing the legalization of abortion, the training of medical
personnel, and ensuring access to reproductive-health services.[44]

An unsafe abortion can lead to wide range of health risks that can affect the
well-being of women. The major and most life-threatening complications that
stem from unsafe abortions are infection, hemorrhaging and injury to internal
organs.[47]

Abortion symptoms that can lead to additional health risks:

        
                  * To provide the necessary treatment, an accurate assessment of an unsafe abortion is critical. Some signs and symptoms that require immediate attention by a licensed health care provider include: abdominal pain, vaginal infection, abnormal vaginal bleeding, shock (collapse of the circulatory system).[47]
          * It is difficult to diagnose complications that result from an unsafe abortion. A woman with an extra-uterine or ectopic pregnancy may have symptoms similar to those of incomplete abortion. Therefore, it is important for health care providers to refer individuals they are unsure about to a facility where a definitive diagnosis can be made and care can be provided.[48]
        

Complications and their treatments include:

        
                  * Infection: antibiotics prescribed by a health care provider and removing tissue from the affected area.
          * Hemorrhage: swift treatment by a health care provider is imperative, as delays can be fatal.
        

Damage to the genital tract or internal organs: Admission to a health care
facility is imperative, any delay can be fatal.[49]

### Treatment of complications[edit]

Regardless if an abortion was legal or illegal, health care providers are
required by law to provide medical care to patients, as it may be life-saving.
In some cases, treatment for abortion complications may be administered only
when the woman provides information about the abortion and provides
information about any and all persons that were involved.[50]

It is difficult to get a confession from a women seeking emergency medical
care as a result of an illegal abortion because it puts women's lives at risk.
However, it is a legal requirement for doctors to report cases of women who
have undergone any type of abortion. Any delay in care increases the risks to
women’s health and lives. [50]

## See also[edit]

        
                  * Reproductive health
          * Reproductive rights
          * Gerri Santoro
        

## References[edit]

        
                  1. **^** _Safe Abortion: Technical and Policy Guidance for Health Systems_ , page 12 (World Health Organization 2003): "a procedure for terminating an unwanted pregnancy either by persons lacking the necessary skill or in an environment lacking the minimum medical standards, or both."
          2. **^** "Unsafe abortion: Global and regional estimates of the incidence of unsafe abortion and associated mortality in 2003" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2007. Retrieved March 7, 2011. "The estimates given in this document are intended to reflect induced abortions that carry greater risk than those carried out officially for reasons accepted in the laws of a country."
          3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "Preventing unsafe abortion". _www.who.int_. Retrieved  19 April 2019.
          4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Rosenthal E (October 2007). "Legal or Not, Abortion Rates Compare". _New York Times_. Retrieved  2009-06-30.
          5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Blas, Erik et al. _Equity, social determinants and public health programmes_ , pages 182-183 (World Health Organization 2010).
          6. **^** Chaudhuri, S.K. Practice Of Fertility Control: A Comprehensive Manual, 7th Edition, page 259 (Elsevier India, 2007).
          7. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Singh, Susheela et al. _Adding it Up: The Costs and Benefits of Investing in Family Planning and Newborn Health_ (New York: Guttmacher Institute and United Nations Population Fund 2009): "If women’s contraceptive needs were addressed...the number of unsafe abortions would decline by 73% from 20 million to 5.5 million." A few of the findings in that report were subsequently changed, and are available at: "Facts on Investing in Family Planning and Maternal and Newborn Health Archived 2012-03-24 at the Wayback Machine" (Guttmacher Institute 2010).
          8. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Haddad LB, Nour NM (2009). "Unsafe abortion: unnecessary maternal mortality". _Reviews in Obstetrics & Gynecology_. **2** (2): 122–6. PMC 2709326. PMID 19609407.
          9. **^** Ganatra B, Gerdts C, Rossier C, Johnson BR, Tunçalp Ö, Assifi A, Sedgh G, Singh S, Bankole A, Popinchalk A, Bearak J, Kang Z, Alkema L (November 2017). "Global, regional, and subregional classification of abortions by safety, 2010-14: estimates from a Bayesian hierarchical model". _Lancet_. **390** (10110): 2372–2381. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31794-4. PMID 28964589.
          10. **^** "Unsafe abortion Global and regional estimates of the incidence of unsafe abortion and associated mortality in 2008, pg2" (World Health Organization 2011): "It was estimated that in 2003 approximately 42 million pregnancies were voluntarily terminated: 22 million safely and 20 million unsafely."
          11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Induced Abortion Worldwide". _Guttmacher Institute_. 2016-05-10. Retrieved  2018-03-08.
          12. **^** Nour NM (2008). "An Introduction to Maternal Mortality". _Reviews in Ob Gyn_. **1** : 77–81.
          13. **^** Grimes DA (2003-12-01). "Unsafe Abortion: The Silent Scourge". _British Medical Bulletin_. **67** (1): 99–113. doi:10.1093/bmb/ldg002. Retrieved  2012-11-03.
          14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Grimes DA. "Unsafe Abortion - The Preventable Pandemic*". Retrieved 2010-01-16.
          15. **^** Nations MK, Misago C, Fonseca W, Correia LL, Campbell OM (June 1997). "Women's hidden transcripts about abortion in Brazil". _Social Science & Medicine_. **44** (12): 1833–45. doi:10.1016/s0277-9536(96)00293-6. PMID 9194245.
          16. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Preventing unsafe abortion". WHO. Retrieved  2014-03-28.
          17. **^** "New findings from the WHO Multicountry Survey on Maternal and Newborn Health". WHO. Retrieved  2014-03-28.
          18. **^** Sedgh G, Henshaw S, Singh S, Ahman E, Shah IH (October 2007). "Induced abortion: estimated rates and trends worldwide". _Lancet_. **370** (9595): 1338–45. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.454.4197. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61575-X. PMID 17933648.
          19. **^** Welch, A. (2017, September 27). Report finds nearly half of all abortions worldwide are unsafe. Retrieved December 05, 2017, from https://www.cbsnews.com/news/report-finds-nearly-half-of-all-abortions-worldwide-are-unsafe/
          20. **^** Chaudhuri, S.K. _Practice Of Fertility Control: A Comprehensive Manual_ , 7th Edition, page 259 (Elsevier India, 2007).
          21. **^** Faúndes, Aníbal and Barzelatto, José. _The Human Drama of Abortion: a Global Search for Consensus_ , page 21 (Vanderbilt University Press 2006).
          22. **^** "Unsafe abortion: Global and regional estimates of the incidence of unsafe abortion and associated mortality in 2003" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2007. Retrieved March 7, 2011. "In several countries, the legalization of abortion has not been followed by elimination of unsafe abortion."
          23. **^** Safe Abortion: Technical and Policy Guidance for Health Systems, page 15 (World Health Organization 2003).
          24. **^** "Abortion Distortions: Senators from both sides make false claims about Roe v. Wade" Archived 2011-07-26 at the Wayback Machine, FactCheck.org (2005-08-22): "Sen. Boxer claimed that overturning Roe v. Wade would cost the lives of more than 5,000 pregnant women a year. That might have been true before the invention of penicillin and the birth control pill, but it's not true now. The best evidence indicates that the annual deaths from illegal abortions would number in the hundreds, not thousands."
          25. **^** WHO pre-print copy of Grimes DA, Benson J, Singh S, Romero M, Ganatra B, Okonofua FE, Shah IH (November 2006). "Unsafe abortion: the preventable pandemic". _Lancet_. **368** (9550): 1908–19. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(06)69481-6. PMID 17126724.
          26. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Wilson J (22 January 2013). "Before and after Roe v. Wade - CNN". _CNN_. Retrieved  7 December 2017.
          27. **^** Kliff S (22 January 2013). "CHARTS: How Roe v. Wade changed abortion rights". Retrieved 7 December 2017 - via www.WashingtonPost.com.
          28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "What Americans Have Forgotten About The Era Before Roe v. Wade". _ThinkProgress.org_. Retrieved  7 December 2017.
          29. **^** "Lessons from Before Roe: Will Past be Prologue?". 22 September 2004.
          30. **^** Cardenas E, Hunter G (5 January 2005). "Boy Faces Felony in Baseball Bat Abortion". _Detroit News_.
          31. **^** White P (January 13–21, 2005). "Baseball Bat Abortion". Boulder Weekly. Retrieved 2009-05-31.
          32. **^** "Michigan: Restrictions on Young Women's Access to Abortion". NARAL Pro-Choice America. Retrieved  2009-05-31.
          33. **^** "Pacifica Radio". 2003-01-22. Retrieved  2009-05-31.
          34. **^** Platner J (2006-09-15). "Remembering Becky Bell". Planned Parenthood Golden Gate. Retrieved 2009-05-31.
          35. **^** "Investigation of the Women's Medical Society Grand Jury Report". _Phila.gov_. Retrieved  7 December 2017.
          36. **^** Soubiran A (1969). _Diary of a Woman in White_ (English ed.). Avon Books. pp. 98–99. citing Henri Modnor (1935). _Fatal Abortions_.
          37. **^** Avery M (1939). "My Family Speaks". _Confessions of an Abortionist: Intimate Sidelights on the Secret Human, Sorrow, Drama and Tragedy in the Experience of a Doctor Whose Profession it is to Perform Illegal Operations_ (First ed.). Haldeman-Julius Company.. Accessed 14 December 2012.
          38. **^** Andrew Walker (7 April 2008). "Saving Nigerians from risky abortions". BBC News. Retrieved 31 May 2009.
          39. **^** Rastegari E.C., Uretsky S. Encyclopedia of Surgery: Uterine stimulants. Accessed 14 December 2012.
          40. **^** Ganatra B, Gerdts C, Rossier C, Johnson Jr B R, Tuncalp Ö, Assifi A, Sedgh G, Singh S, Bankole A, Popinchalk A, Bearak J, Kang Z, Alkema L. Global, regional, and subregional classification of abortions by safety, 2010–14: estimates from a Bayesian hierarchical model. The Lancet. 2017 Sep
          41. **^** Say L, Chou D, Gemmill A, Tunçalp Ö, Moller AB, Daniels J, Gülmezoglu AM, Temmerman M, Alkema L. Global causes of maternal death: a WHO systematic analysis. Lancet Glob Health. 2014 Jun; 2(6):e323-33.
          42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Grimes DA, Benson J, Singh S, Romero M, Ganatra B, Okonofua FE, Shah IH (November 2006). "Unsafe abortion: the preventable pandemic" (PDF). _Lancet_. **368** (9550): 1908–19. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69481-6. PMID 17126724.
          43. **^** Berer M (November 2004). "National laws and unsafe abortion: the parameters of change". _Reproductive Health Matters_. **12** (24 Suppl): 1–8. doi:10.1016/S0968-8080(04)24024-1. PMID 15938152.
          44. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Berer M (2000). "Making abortions safe: a matter of good public health policy and practice". _Bulletin of the World Health Organization_. **78** (5): 580–92. PMC 2560758. PMID 10859852.
          45. **^** Jewkes R, Rees H, Dickson K, Brown H, Levin J (March 2005). "The impact of age on the epidemiology of incomplete abortions in South Africa after legislative change". _Bjog_. **112** (3): 355–9. doi:10.1111/j.1471-0528.2004.00422.x. PMID 15713153.
          46. **^** Bateman C (December 2007). "Maternal mortalities 90% down as legal TOPs more than triple". _South African Medical Journal = Suid-Afrikaanse Tydskrif Vir Geneeskunde_. **97** (12): 1238–42. PMID 18264602.
          47. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Preventing unsafe abortion". _World Health Organization_. Retrieved  7 December 2017.
          48. **^** Vlassoff _et al._ Economic impact of unsafe abortion-related morbidity and mortality: evidence and estimation challenges. Brighton, Institute of Development Studies, 2008 (IDS Research Reports 59).
          49. **^** L Haddad. Unsafe Abortion: Unnecessary Maternal Mortality. Rev Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Spring; 2(2): 122–126.
          50. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Human Rights Committee; Committee Against Torture; Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women.
        

## External links[edit]

        
                  * World Health Organization, index for Sexual and reproductive health
          * Preventing Unsafe Abortion and its Consequences: Priorities for Research and Action, New York: Guttmacher Institute, 2006
          * My Back-Alley Abortion, via BeliefNet
        
          * v
          * t
          * e
        

Abortion

* * *

Main topics|

        
                  * History of abortion
          * Methods of abortion
          * Abortion debate
          * Abortion law
        

Movements|

        
                  * Abortion-rights movements
          * Anti-abortion movements
        

Issues|

        
                  * Abortion and mental health
          * Beginning of human personhood
          * Beginning of pregnancy controversy
          * Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis
          * Anti-abortion violence
          * Abortion under communism
          * Birth control
          * Crisis pregnancy center
          * Ethical aspects of abortion
          * Eugenics
          * Fetal rights
          * Forced abortion
          * Genetics and abortion
          * Late-term abortion
          * Legalized abortion and crime effect
          * Libertarian perspectives on abortion
          * Limit of viability
          * Men's rights
          * Minors and abortion
          * One-child policy
          * Paternal rights and abortion
          * Philosophical aspects of the abortion debate
          * Prenatal development
          * Reproductive rights
          * Self-induced abortion
          * Sex-selective abortion
          * Sidewalk counseling
          * Societal attitudes towards abortion
          * Toxic abortion
          * Unsafe abortion
          * Women's rights
        

By country|

| Africa|

        
                  * Algeria
          * Angola
          * Benin
          * Botswana
          * Burkina Faso
          * Burundi
          * Cameroon
          * Cape Verde
          * Central African Republic
          * Chad
          * Egypt
          * Ghana
          * Namibia
          * Nigeria
          * South Africa
          * Uganda
          * Zimbabwe
        

---|---  
Asia|

        
                  * Afghanistan
          * Armenia
          * Azerbaijan
          * Bahrain
          * Bangladesh
          * Bhutan
          * Brunei
          * Cambodia
          * China
          * Cyprus
          * Georgia
          * East Timor
          * India
          * Iran
          * Israel
          * Japan
          * Kazakhstan
          * Northern Cyprus
          * South Korea
          * Philippines
          * Qatar
          * Saudi Arabia
          * Turkey
        

Europe|

        
                  * Albania
          * Andorra
          * Austria
          * Belarus
          * Belgium
          * Bosnia and Herzegovina
          * Bulgaria
          * Croatia
          * Czech Republic
          * Denmark
          * Estonia
          * Finland
          * France
          * Germany
          * Greece
          * Hungary
          * Iceland
          * Ireland
          * Italy
          * Kazakhstan
          * Latvia
          * Liechtenstein
          * Lithuania
          * Luxembourg
          * Malta
          * Moldova
          * Monaco
          * Montenegro
          * Netherlands
          * North Macedonia
          * Norway
          * Poland
          * Portugal
          * Romania
          * Russia
          * San Marino
          * Serbia
          * Slovakia
          * Slovenia
          * Spain
          * Sweden
          * Switzerland
          * Ukraine
          * United Kingdom
        

North America|

        
                  * Belize
          * Canada
          * Costa Rica
          * Cuba
          * Dominican Republic
          * El Salvador
          * Guatemala
          * Mexico
          * Nicaragua
          * Panama
          * Trinidad and Tobago
          * United States
        

Oceania|

        
                  * Australia
          * Micronesia
          * Fiji
          * Kiribati
          * Marshall Islands
          * New Zealand
          * Papua New Guinea
          * Samoa
          * Solomon Islands
          * Tonga
          * Tuvalu
          * Vanuatu
        

South America|

        
                  * Argentina
          * Bolivia
          * Brazil
          * Chile
          * Colombia
          * Ecuador
          * Guyana
          * Paraguay
          * Peru
          * Suriname
          * Uruguay
          * Venezuela
        

Law|

        
                  * Case law
          * Constitutional law
          * History of abortion law
          * Laws by country
          * Buffer zones
          * Conscientious objection
          * Fetal protection
          * Heartbeat bills
          * Informed consent
          * Late-term restrictions
          * Parental involvement
          * Spousal consent
        

Methods|

        
                  * Vacuum aspiration
          * Dilation and evacuation
          * Dilation and curettage
          * Intact D&X
          * Hysterotomy
          * Instillation
          * Menstrual extraction
          * Abortifacient drugs
            * Methotrexate
            * Mifepristone
            * Misoprostol
            * Oxytocin
          * Self-induced abortion
          * Unsafe abortion
        

Religion|

        
                  * Buddhism
          * Christianity
            * Catholicism
          * Hinduism
          * Islam
          * Judaism
          * Scientology
        
          * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category
        

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unsafe_abortion&oldid=900629237"

Categories:

        
                  * Abortion
        

Hidden categories:

        
                  * Webarchive template wayback links
        

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

        
                  * Not logged in
          * Talk
          * Contributions
          * Create account
          * Log in
        

### Namespaces

        
                  * Article
          * Talk
        

### Variants

### Views

        
                  * Read
          * Edit
          * View history
        

### More

### Search

### Navigation

        
                  * Main page
          * Contents
          * Featured content
          * Current events
          * Random article
          * Donate to Wikipedia
          * Wikipedia store
        

### Interaction

        
                  * Help
          * About Wikipedia
          * Community portal
          * Recent changes
          * Contact page
        

### Tools

        
                  * What links here
          * Related changes
          * Upload file
          * Special pages
          * Permanent link
          * Page information
          * Wikidata item
          * Cite this page
        

### Print/export

        
                  * Create a book
          * Download as PDF
          * Printable version
        

### Languages

        
                  * Deutsch
          * Español
          * Français
          * Simple English
          * Tiếng Việt
        

Edit links

        
                  * This page was last edited on 6 June 2019, at 19:04 (UTC).
          * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
          * Privacy policy
          * About Wikipedia
          * Disclaimers
          * Contact Wikipedia
          * Developers
          * Cookie statement
          * Mobile view
          * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)
          * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)
        

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

