

Skip to content

![Northpoint Recovery Drug & Alcohol Rehab Blog

Logo](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/logo-

white.png)

Speak to an Addiction Specialist

## (888) 280-3348

__Take a Quiz

  * Blog
  * About Us
    * About Northpoint Recovery
    * Our Staff
    * Our Facility
    * Admissions
    * FAQ
    * Employment
    * Testimonials
    * Proven Outcomes
    * Joint Commission Accreditation
  * Drug Rehab
    * 28-Day Drug Rehab & Detox Program
    * Drug Rehab Guide
  * Alcohol Detox
    * 28-Day Alcohol Detox & Rehab Program
    * Alcohol Detox & Rehab Guide
  * Services
    * Drug Rehab
    * Drug Detox
    * Vivitrol Services
    * Dual Diagnosis Treatment
    * Alumni
  * Resources
    * Alcohol Detox & Rehab
    * Drug Detox & Rehab
    * Take a Quiz
    * Drug Information
    * Addiction Guides
    * Addiction Questions
    * For Addicted Professionals
    * For Family Members
    * Resources Near You
    * Drug Mixer Tool
    * Mixing Alcohol & Drugs
    * Dual Diagnosis
    * Infographics
    * Podcast
  * Locations
    * Northpoint Recovery Idaho
    * Ashwood Recovery: Boise, ID
    * Ashwood Recovery: Nampa, ID
    * Northpoint Washington
    * Northpoint Evergreen Bellevue, WA
  * Contact Us
    * Free Addiction Assessment
    * Verify Insurance
    * Contact Us
  * Search for:

  * __Menu

    * About Us
    * About Northpoint Recovery
    * Our Staff
    * Our Facility
    * Admissions
    * Testimonials
    * Proven Outcomes
    * Drug Rehab
    * 28-Day Drug Rehab & Detox Program
    * Drug Rehab Guide
    * Medical Detox
    * Alcohol Detox
    * Alcohol Detox & Rehab Guide
    * Alcohol Detox & Rehab Guide
    * Medical Detox
    * Locations
    * Northpoint Recovery Idaho
    * Ashwood Recovery: Boise, ID
    * Ashwood Recovery: Nampa, ID
    * Northpoint Washington
    * Northpoint Evergreen Bellevue, WA
  * Blog
  * Contact
    * Contact Us
    * Free Phone Assessment
    * Verify Insurance
  * (888) 280-3348
  * Speak to an Addiction Specialist Now:
  * Search for:

# Explained: Narconon and Its Connection to Scientology

Explained: Narconon and Its Connection to Scientology

Referring to Narconon, Tony Ortega wrote, _“Scientology advertises that
they’re going to give you individualized drug counseling. And they’re very
careful never to tell you that you won’t be talking about drugs at all. You’re
just getting Scientology training.”_

That assertion by Ortega, a journalist who has been writing about Scientology
since 1995, does not present a unique or biased position. Rather, since its
inception, Narconon has been a magnet for both controversy and criticism.

## **First Things First – What Is Narconon?**

Narconon presents itself as a substance abuse treatment program. Founded in
1966, the organization’s philosophy on addiction and recovery are a reflection
of the theories of L. Ron Hubbard, the founder of Scientology. It is important
to note that Hubbard did not have any special medical or scientific
qualifications.

It is of little surprise, then, that many of Narconon’s positions on addiction
and recovery are at odds with the general consensus among medical and
addiction treatment specialists.

![addiction](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-

content/uploads/2015/06/is_addiction_really_a_disease-600x600.jpg)

## **What Does the Narconon Program Consist of?**

Narconon rejects the "addiction as a disease" model, saying that the concept
takes power and responsibility away from the individual. Instead, their
treatment program can be broken down into 4 stages:

  * “Drug-free” and “non-medical” withdrawal – The program does not support Opioid Replacement Therapy or Medication-Assisted Therapy, disavowing the idea that a drug addict can be helped by giving them more drugs.
  * Training Routines – Performed with another person in order to “ _bring about interaction between the individual and the existing physical universe_ ”. This is done in lieu of the accepted model of therapeutic individual and group counseling that is employed by “mainstream” drug rehab programs.
  * New Life Detoxification – Focuses on a regimen of vitamins and nutritional supplements, “laying on of hands” faith healing, exercise, diet, sauna, hydration, and adequate sleep for “detoxification”.
  * Life Improvement Courses – During this phase, patients are instructed on new “Life Skills” and “Objectives” that are supposed to help them move beyond their destructive and self-limiting pasts.

## **Addressing the Controversy – DOES the Church of Scientology Own

Narconon?**

Yes, although both Narconon and the Church insist that the program is secular
and completely independent. Officially, they state that Narconon legitimately
provides drug education and rehabilitation.

However, multiple lawsuits, investigations, governments, and even former
patients allege that Narconon is little more than a “front” with a mission
statement of introducing vulnerable individuals to Scientology for
recruitment.

![recovery](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-

content/uploads/2018/01/narconon_and_its_connection_to_scientology.jpg)

## **Does It Matter That Scientology Owns Narconon?**

Again, yes.

The fact of ownership, per se, isn’t the problem. Rather, the issues are as
follows:

  * Transparency – Nowhere on Narconon’s website do they mention Scientology. Instead, they tout adherence to the theories of Hubbard, calling him merely a “author and humanitarian”.

This lack of transparency is evidenced by the links that Narconon will go to
disguise its association with Scientology. For example, Narconon is
“officially” owned by the Association for Better Living and Education, which
is itself entirely run by Scientologists.

In addition, Narconon also owns and operates several facilities under
different names, including:

  * The Truth about Drugs

  * Teen-Anon

  * Suncoast Rehabilitation Center

  * Sober Living in Orange County

  * Say No to Drugs, Say Yes to Life

  * Rainbow Canyon Rehabilitation Center

  * Pur Detox

  * Israel Says No to Drugs

  * Get off Drugs Naturally

  * Fresh Start

  * Foundation for a Drug-Free World

  * Drug-Free Ambassadors

  * Blue by the Sea

  * Agenda – Is the true goal to help drug addicts recover? Or is Narconon instead a profit-driven recruitment tool for the Church of Scientology?

  * Legality – There are restrictions in place that govern the activities of religious organizations and their ability to use public funding.

## **How Successful Is the Narconon Program?**

Narconon claims of success are remarkably high, ranging between **60% and
86%**. Their defined measure of success is a client who has completed the
program and remained drug-free for at least one year afterwards.

Critics of Narconon, however, point to a few disquieting facts:

  * Narconon’s own publicity materials present different success rates – _8 publications, 7 different results_.
  * Lack of documentation for the claims, which are often touted without citation.
  * At least 2 of the sources are, in fact, Scientology publications, indicating a strong possibility of bias.
  * By having a very broad interpretation of results, Narconon is criticized for misrepresenting their supposedly success.

It is this last practice that is of particular concern.

For example, Narconon frequently points to a 1981 Swedish study that
supposedly shows the program has a success rate of **78.6%**. This same study
is also the quoted source reporting that Narconon was **84.6%** successful.

However, a closer examination of the report paints an entirely different – and
unflattering – picture.

  * Entering the program – **61** people
  * Left during detoxification – **24**
  * Left during the other stages – **23**
  * Completed the program – **14**

Right away, you can see that neither percentage representing the entire sample
could possibly be true, because the “graduation” rate – 14/61 – was just
**under 23%**.

13 of the 14 graduates were able to be contacted. Of those, 4 had stayed drug-
free since graduation, and 7 were currently drug-free, even though they had
previously relapsed. This is the source of the “84.6” figure – 11/13. The
“78.6%” figure is arrived at when the missing 14th person is included – 11/14.

But obviously, these are incomplete representations. Remember, **_only 4
people_** who had entered the program were able to stay drug-free.

When you divide those 4 by the 61, who had entered the program, Narconon’s
“success” rate drops to just **6.6%**.

## **About Narconon’s Withdrawal Stage**

During the withdrawal stage, a physically-dependent person entering the
program is first given a physical by the on-call Medical Director. For relief
during withdrawal, clients are given vitamins and minerals to supposedly help
with physical symptoms, along with supportive care from Narconon staff and a
nurse.

As a branch of Scientology, Narconon does NOT give palliative drugs to ease
withdrawal. Once the stage has begun, the client is cut off, _period_.

A major criticism of this approach is the fact that this strategy is used for
every client and for all drugs, despite their different addictive natures. For
example, while withdrawal from marijuana is relatively mild, quitting opioids
can be harshly painful and unpleasant, while abrupt alcohol or benzodiazepine
withdrawal can be extremely dangerous – _even fatal_.

Yet the same approach is used, each time.

This is in complete contrast to the most-recognized evidence-based practices
today, which have determined that medical supervision and medication
assistance provides the safest and most effective way to get through
withdrawal.

![About Narconon’s Withdrawal

Stage](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-

content/uploads/2017/09/what_heroin_withdrawal_felt_like-600x399.jpg)

## **About Narconon’s Training Routines**

The “TRs” of Narconon lifted directly from the doctrine and religious
practices of Scientology, even though they are supposedly separate. They are a
series of routines that are not based in any accepted psychological or
behavioral counseling techniques.

One of the biggest criticisms from a past client was how the routines were
rigidly practiced with no explanation of WHY they were practiced. For example,
one exercise involves staring into the coach’s eyes, and this would be
practiced for hours on end. Yet, the client was given no explanation as to why
this particular exercise was necessary.

## **About Narconon’s New Life Detoxification Program**

This is one of the most-controversial aspect of Narconon’s recovery program.
Critics call it “quackery” at best, and DANGEROUS at worst.

Again, although Narconon and Scientology are supposed to be separate, the
Detox portion of the program is virtually an exact copy of Scientology’s
“Purification” ritual.

It starts with the scientifically unsound theory that all drugs are stored
long-term in body fat. The procedures involved in this stage are all designed
to “sweat” those drugs out.

  * The Niacin “Drug Bomb” – Hubbard – _again, neither a scientist nor a medical professional_ – that niacin would help mobilize toxins stored within the body so they could be eliminated through sweat. Clients are given massive doses of niacin – **up to** **4000 mg per day**.

To put that number in perspective, the recommended daily allowance suggested
by the US Institute of Medicine is **only 14-16 mg a day**. Adverse effects
begin manifesting at dosages **over 50 mg.**

  * Exercise – To increase circulation, distribute the niacin, and quickly eliminate drugs and toxins.
  * Sauna – To force sweating. While generally, people are told not to remain in a sauna for more than 30 minutes, Narconon enforces sauna sessions of **up to 5 hours**.
  * Vitamins, minerals, and oils – The dosages given FAR in excess of what is recommended.

Each of these procedures are based on Hubbard’s _beliefs_ – not accepted
science.

![sobriety](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-

content/uploads/2016/11/six_good_reasons_to_treat_your_mind_and_body_right-400x600.jpg)

## **Deaths during the Narconon Program**

Here’s the worst part – most of Narconon’s staff has NO medical training. Each
facility DOES have a medical director and a nurse, but they are typically on
call, rather than on-site.

In practice, this has resulted in some adverse reactions and medical
emergencies that were instead misidentified by unqualified staff as positive
proof that the detoxification was working.

  * 1984, Grancey-sur-Ource, France – Jocelyne Dorffman died because of an untreated, epileptic seizure. Staff neither gave sufficient emergency treatment nor called for qualified medical assistance.
  * 1995, Valsassina, Italy – 2 young men in their 20s died during the detoxification phase of treatment –Paride Ella of kidney failure, and Giuseppe Tomba of a heart attack. Both men exhibited similar symptoms, 4 days before their deaths. The facility had no medical personnel on-site, and other staff members were unable to properly judge the seriousness of their conditions.
  * 2002, Torre dell'Orso, Italy – a 33-year-old female client died from peritonitis, after complaining of stomach pains, the day before. Staff members had not recognized her symptoms, and had therefore not given her sufficient medical attention.
  * 2008, Norcross, Georgia – Patrick Desmond died of a heroin overdose. In the subsequent investigation, the facility intentionally provided misleading documents to the state.
  * 2009-2012, Arrowhead, Oklahoma – 4 different people – Kaysie Dianne Werninck, Gabriel Graves, Hillary Holten, and Stacy Murphy – died at the Narconon facility. In 2013, the state permanently revoked, Narconon’s permit for medical detoxification.

## **What’s the Bottom Line about Narconon?**

There is no ONE standard treatment program that can help every addicted person
100% of the time. Every rehab program or facility has its own philosophy and
employs its own unique strategies to help clients in need.

All that being said, the era of treating patients based on personal beliefs is
long over with. Today, the best alcohol and drug recovery programs are
evidence-based – using accepted data and the latest science to shape effective
policies and procedures.

This is important for several reasons:

FIRST – addiction has been positively identified as a disease – a legitimate
disorder of the brain characterized by a recognized set of symptoms. As such,
it should be treated like every other medical condition – with strategies that
have been proven to be both safe and effective.

Narconon rejects the disease model, and therefore ignores best practices.

SECOND – as science advances and increases our understanding disease of
addiction, treatment approaches must likewise evolve to best serve patients.

Narconon still bases their treatment on the outdated and unscientific beliefs
of a person with no medical training. Even worse, Hubbard died **more than 30
years ago**.

THIRD – Substance use is dangerous. Besides the risk of overdose, patients
must also often deal with other associated health problems either caused or
worsened by their addiction. Anyone in a recovery program should be supervised
by qualified medical personnel.

By not having qualified medical personnel on-site, Narconon puts its clients
at-risk.

FOURTH – Alcohol and drug withdrawal is a difficult and dangerous time during
early recovery. It is crucial that anyone detoxing from intoxicating
substances receives the proper services and support that will keep them as
comfortable and safe as possible during this time.

By rejecting medication-assisted detox, Narconon subjects its clients to
unnecessary discomfort, pain, and danger.

Explained: Narconon and Its Connection to Scientology

5 (100%) 2 votes

By Northpoint Recovery|2019-03-22T18:50:22+00:00January 10th, 2018|

#### Share This Story!

FacebookTwitterGoogle+TumblrPinterestEmail

### About the Author: Northpoint Recovery

![Northpoint Recovery](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-

content/uploads/2018/08/np-logo-square-150x150.jpg)

Northpoint Recovery is the premier drug and alcohol rehab, detox, and
treatment facility in the Northwestern United States.

### Related Posts

  * ![Overcoming Addiction in Idaho \(Opioids, Alcohol & Meth\)](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/ribbon-cutting-500x383.jpg)

#### Overcoming Addiction in Idaho (Opioids, Alcohol & Meth)

  * ![9 Truthful Songs About Addiction and Recovery](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/truthful_songs_about_addiction_and_recovery-500x383.jpg)

#### 9 Truthful Songs About Addiction and Recovery

  * ![Psychiatrist vs. Psychologist vs. Therapist: What are the real differences?](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Psychologist_vs_therapist_vs_psychiatrist-500x383.jpg)

#### Psychiatrist vs. Psychologist vs. Therapist: What are the real

differences?

  * ![9 Truths about Sobriety that Everyone Should Know](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/truths-about-sobriety-500x383.jpg)

#### 9 Truths about Sobriety that Everyone Should Know

  * ![We Are Excited for the Grand Opening of Northpoint Washington, Our Newest Inpatient Addiction Treatment Center in Edmonds, Washington](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/northpoint-washington-500x383.png)

#### We Are Excited for the Grand Opening of Northpoint Washington, Our

Newest Inpatient Addiction Treatment Center in Edmonds, Washington

### Leave A Comment Cancel reply

Comment

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

**Currently you have JavaScript disabled. In order to post comments, please
make sure JavaScript and Cookies are enabled, and reload the page.** Click
here for instructions on how to enable JavaScript in your browser.

![sidebar-contact-us](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-

content/uploads/2019/04/sidebar-contact-us-button.png)

Contact Us

![sidebar-ashwood-link](https://www.northpointrecovery.com/blog/wp-

content/uploads/2018/10/Check-out-our-outpatient-centers-in-Boise-and-

Nampa.png)

#### Contact Us

Northpoint Recovery  
10787 W. Ustick Rd  
Boise, ID 83713

Admissions: (888) 280-3348  
info@northpointrecovery.com

![This site is SSL secured](/images/logo-ssl-secured.png)

![Northpoint Logo](/images/footer-logo.png)

#### A Clear Vision of Hope

Northpoint Recovery offers an outstanding drug and alcohol counseling program
that is highly effective and affordable.

#### Connect With Us

![Northpoint Recovery BBB Business Review](https://seal-

boise.bbb.org/seals/blue-seal-120-61-northpoint-recovery-1000018260.png)

Copyright 2012 - 2018 Northpoint Recovery | All Rights Reserved

__ **Get the help you need right now**  
(888) 280-3348

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[RSS]: Really Simple Syndication

