

BREAKING NEWS

Tap here to turn on desktop notifications to get the news sent straight to
you.

Open Search

![HuffPost](https://s.m.huffpost.com/assets/HuffPostHero-d783f680fb974e80346bdfa145131d058e596e1d32f791981875aa481702c770.svg)

Log In Join HuffPost Plus

POLITICS

12/28/2015 04:08 pm ET **Updated** Dec 30, 2015

# Here's How Many People Fatally Overdosed On Marijuana Last Year

The rate has held steady from previous years.

![headshot](https://img.huffingtonpost.com/asset/55f068ab1700001900569bf4.jpg?ops=100_100)

By Kim Bellware

  *     *       *         *           * 

With marijuana now legal in some form throughout 23 states, the number of
Americans who fatally overdosed on the drug last year was significant:

The rate of absolutely zero deaths from a marijuana overdose remained steady
from last year, according to figures released this month by the Centers for
Disease Control. But while Americans aren't dying as a result of marijuana
overdoses, the same can't be said for a range of other substances, both legal
and illicit.

![](https://img.huffingtonpost.com/asset/5681725a190000380178aaec.jpeg?ops=scalefit_720_noupscale)

CDC

A total of 17,465 people died from overdosing on illicit drugs like heroin and
cocaine last year, while 25,760 people died from overdosing on prescription
drugs, including painkillers and tranquilizers like Valium, according to CDC
figures.

Opioid overdose levels rose so sharply in 2014 -- spiking 14 percent from the
previous year -- the CDC described the levels as "epidemic."

"More persons died from drug overdoses in the United States in 2014 than
during any previous year on record," the CDC reported earlier this month.

![](https://img.huffingtonpost.com/asset/56817293190000380178aaed.jpeg?ops=scalefit_720_noupscale)

CDC

Alcohol, an even more accessible substance, is killing Americans at a rate not
seen in roughly 35 years, according to a Washington Post analysis of federal
data. The more than 30,700 Americans who died from alcohol-induced causes last
year doesn't include alcohol-related deaths like drunk driving or accidents;
if it did, the death toll would be more than two and a half times higher.

According to a widely cited 2006 report in American Scientist, "alcohol is
more lethal than many other commonly abused substances." The report further
puts the lethality of various substances in perspective:

> Drinking a mere 10 times the normal amount of alcohol within 5 or 10 minutes
can prove fatal, whereas smoking or eating marijuana might require something
like 1,000 times the usual dose to cause death.

Though marijuana has yet to lead to a fatal overdose in the U.S., it does have
the potential to be abused and lead to dangerous behaviors like drugged
driving -- but taking too much will likely lead to, if anything, a really bad
trip.

Despite the changing tide in American attitudes toward marijuana for both
therapeutic and recreational uses, legalization is still vigorously opposed by
groups like the pharmaceutical lobby (who stand to lose big if patients turn
to medical marijuana for treatment) and police unions (who stand to lose
federal funding for the war on drugs).

Even among 2016 presidential contenders, Democratic hopeful Sen. Bernie
Sanders (I-Vt.) is the only candidate from either party to support outright
legalization of marijuana by removing it from the federal list of Schedule 1
drugs, which includes substances like heroin and LSD.

_**CORRECTION** : This article previously mischaracterized Valium as a
painkiller. It is used as a tranquilizer and in the treatment of anxiety-
related conditions._

_**Also on HuffPost:**_

PHOTO GALLERY

Top 50 Most Influential Marijuana Users

Download

REAL LIFE. REAL NEWS. REAL VOICES.

Help us tell more of the stories that matter from voices that too often remain
unheard.

Join HuffPost Plus

_Do you have information you want to share with HuffPost?Here’s how._

![headshot](https://img.huffingtonpost.com/asset/55f068ab1700001900569bf4.jpg?ops=100_100)

Kim Bellware

Reporter, HuffPost

Suggest a correction

#### MORE:

Marijuana Marijuana Overdoses 2015

![HuffPost](https://s.m.huffpost.com/assets/H-icon-72fd5782b36a1a42ab82a4af65cbc6dd6ddc4d4a71190a91c5cfaab7c66fd836.svg)

Here's How Many People Fatally Overdosed On Marijuana Last Year

  *     *       *         * 

##### CONVERSATIONS

Real Life. Real News. Real Voices.

Help us tell more of the stories that matter from voices that too often remain
unheard.

Join HuffPost Plus

Let us know what you'd like to see as a HuffPost Member.

Take the survey

![HuffPost](https://s.m.huffpost.com/assets/HuffPostHero-d783f680fb974e80346bdfa145131d058e596e1d32f791981875aa481702c770.svg)

  * About Us
  * Advertise
  * About Our Ads
  * Contact Us
  * RSS
  * FAQ
  * Careers
  * Archive
  * User Agreement
  * Privacy Policy
  * Comment Policy
  * HuffPost Press Room
  * Coupons

Part of HuffPost News. ©2019 Verizon Media. All rights reserved.

U.S. Canada U.K. Australia Brazil España France Ελλάδα (Greece) India Italia
日本 (Japan) 한국 (Korea) Maghreb Quebec

All Editions

News

US News

World News

Business

Environment

Health

Social Justice

Politics

Congress

Donald Trump

2020 Election

Extremism

Entertainment

Culture & Arts

Media

Celebrity

TV & Film

Coupons

Communities

Queer Voices

Women

Black Voices

Latino Voices

Asian Voices

HuffPost Personal

Video

Horoscopes

Style & Beauty

Food & Drink

Parenting

Travel

Finds

Wellness

Relationships

Money

Home & Living

Work/Life

Special Projects

Pride 2019

Impact: Project Zero

Impact: This New World

Highline

Listen to America

Podcasts

From Our Partners

What's Working: Purpose + Profit

Newsletters

Follow us

![HuffPost](https://s.m.huffpost.com/assets/HuffPost-Logo-

Left-21b09569bfefc9a8cbc653ce84457f56babbe8110db830981db681171fd94505.svg)
![HuffPost](https://s.m.huffpost.com/assets/HuffPost-Logo-

Right-b109f49b50e598958eafa8a8405c6896be046ec55882a3cfa902854998b8fbb1.svg)

Here's How Many People Fatally Overdosed On Marijuana Last Year

Top 50 Most Influential Marijuana Users

![<a href="http://www.esquire.com/features/what-ive-learned/snoop-dogg-0708"

target="_blank">“It makes me feel the way I need

t](https://img.huffingtonpost.com/asset/55a01dd6170000dd07326623.jpeg?ops=scalefit_960_noupscale)

1 / 50

50: Snoop Lion

“It makes me feel the way I need to feel.”

Koen van Weel/AFP/Getty Images

  *     *       *         * 

![](https://s.m.huffpost.com/assets/slideshow-tweet-

thumb-86ce75b4fe0b7c897dac13973b0667c9f12ba3c538c72689a0a0ef69fe74f76f.png)
![](https://s.m.huffpost.com/assets/slideshow-youtube-thumb-

bc749e049bc1ccaa0c46e34471943d53a325b9901991bb2b6cc3d62e3d53321f.png)

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=6723616&c3=&c4=&c5=&c6=&c15=&cj=1)
![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=1621685564716533&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=10153394098876130&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

