

Business Insider logo The words "Business Insider".

  * Tech
  * Finance
  * Politics
  * Strategy
  * Life
  * All

##### Tech

    
    
    * Tech Insider
    * Media
    * Science
    * Transportation
    

##### Finance

    
    
    * Finance
    * Markets Insider
    * Retail
    * Your Money
    

##### Politics

    
    
    * Politics
    * Military & Defense
    

##### Strategy

    
    
    * Strategy
    * Advertising
    * Careers
    

##### Life

    
    
    * Life
    * Coupons
    * Entertainment
    * Insider Picks
    * Sports
    

##### Featured

    
    
    * Better Capitalism
    * Embracing Disruption
    * Insider TV
    

##### Subscribe

    
    
    * BI Intelligence
    * BI Prime
    

##### About BI

    
    
    * About
    * Careers
    * Contact Us
    * Advertise
    * Contributors FAQ
    * Corporate
    * Corrections Policy
    

##### Follow BI

    
    
    * Newsletters
    * Events
    * RSS
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Instagram
    * YouTube
    * LinkedIn
    

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

  * BUSINESS INSIDER
  * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
  * BI INTELLIGENCE

World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

Edition

  * BI Prime
  * Intelligence

Menu icon A vertical stack of three evenly spaced horizontal lines.

Edition

International Editions:

  * United States US

Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

  * International INTL
  * Deutschland DE
  * Australia AUS
  * France FR
  * India IN
  * Italy IT
  * Japan JP
  * Malaysia MY
  * Netherlands NL
  * Nordic SE
  * Poland PL
  * Singapore SG
  * South Africa ZA
  * Spain ES

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile. Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click
to perform a search". World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating
different international options."

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

  * BUSINESS INSIDER
  * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
  * BI INTELLIGENCE

  * Tech Enterprise Science advertising Media Transportation Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

  * Finance Markets Insider Retail Your Money Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
  * Politics Military & Defense News Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
  * Strategy Careers Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
  * Life Entertainment Travel Sports Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
  * All
  * Coupons Target Walmart EBay Nike Container Store 

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

  * BUSINESS INSIDER
  * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
  * BI INTELLIGENCE

World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

Edition

US INTL DE AUS FR IN IT JP MY NL SE PL SG ZA ES Business Insider logo The
words "Business Insider". Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter
icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word
"in". YouTube icon A play button in the shape of a television screen.
Instagram icon A stylized camera.

  * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights reserved. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our 
  * Terms of Service , Privacy Policy and Cookies Policy . 

  * Sitemap

  * Disclaimer
  * Commerce Policy
  * Coupons
  * Made in NYC
  * Stock quotes by finanzen.net

Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click to perform a search".
Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification.

# Alcohol companies are placing a huge bet that cable TV isn't dead

Seth Archer

Jun. 22, 2016, 3:11 PM

Facebook Icon The letter F. Link icon An image of a chain link. It symobilizes
a website link url. Email icon An envelope. It indicates the ability to send
an email. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn
icon The word "in". Fliboard icon A stylized letter F.

More icon Three evenly spaced dots forming an ellipsis: "...". Close icon Two
crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an interaction, or
dismiss a notification.

![beer](https://amp.businessinsider.com/images/576ad0c252bcd044008cb087-750-563.jpg)Pabak
Sarkar/flickr Forget Snapchat. Alcohol companies are ramping up advertising
spending, and most of that is still going to television, radio and print. The
industry spends around 89% of its advertising dollars on television, according
to research done by Citigroup.

Last quarter, the alcoholic-beverage industry spent $421 million on
advertising, up 26% compared to the same time last year. Beer brands were far
and away the biggest spenders ($357 million), followed by winemakers ($11
million), according to Wendy Nicholson, an analyst at Citi.

The largest individual spender was the brewer Shock Top, which is owned by
Anheuser-Busch InBev. Shock Top ran a Super Bowl ad campaign with actor T.J.
Miller from Silicon Valley.

Nicholson contributes the increase in spending to a more competitive
environment, and she sees the trend largely continuing as sales in the
industry grow. Still, even outside of television, the industry's preferences
for advertising are decidedly old-school.

TV isn't the only old media alcohol companies are spending on. For
MillerCoors, magazine advertisements were another top category. Boston Beer Co
prefers radio advertisements after television.

Citi Research

The "internet" category, where mobile is king and cord-cutters make up a lot
of the population, is surprisingly one of the smallest for alcohol companies,
representing only 2% of their total ad spending according to Nicholson. That's
not the case in other industries of course. In the first quarter of 2016,
digital advertising across all industries increased 21% to about $15.9 billion
according to the Interactive Advertising Bureau.

### SEE ALSO: EL-ERIAN: Airbnb and Uber used the same 3 factors to disrupt

huge industries

### NOW WATCH:

More: Advertising Alcohol Beer Television

  * Super Bowl

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options.

### Popular

#### Forget the trade war â€” a bigger conflict between the US and China is

playing out right under our noses

### Popular

#### 12 ways HBO changed the Chernobyl story

### Popular

#### Raptors players told their fans to stop heckling Kevin Durant after he

re-injured his calf and it ended in a standing ovation for the Warriors
superstar

### Popular

#### FedEx ditching Amazon is a 'watershed moment' that has huge implications

for the future of logistics

### Popular

#### The male player who said Serena Williams showed 'bad personality' joked

that he wanted to play doubles with her at Wimbledon

Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification. Check mark icon A check mark. It
indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction.

Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an
open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word "in". YouTube icon A play button
in the shape of a television screen. Instagram icon A stylized camera.

Also check out:

  * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights reserved. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our 
  * Terms of Service , Privacy Policy and Cookies Policy . 

  * Sitemap

  * Disclaimer
  * Commerce Policy
  * Coupons
  * Made in NYC
  * Stock quotes by finanzen.net

Edition

International Editions:

  * United States US

Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

  * International INTL
  * Deutschland DE
  * Australia AUS
  * France FR
  * India IN
  * Italy IT
  * Japan JP
  * Malaysia MY
  * Netherlands NL
  * Nordic SE
  * Poland PL
  * Singapore SG
  * South Africa ZA
  * Spain ES

