

Skip to main content

Toggle navigation

![Technion Canada](http://technioncanada.wpengine.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/05/Technion_105x83.png)

MENUMENU

  * Donate Now
  * Search
    * #### Search

Search for:

MENUMENU

  * About
    * Technion Canada
    * Technion - Israel
    * Contact
  * News & Events
    * Calendar
    * Gallery
    * News
    * TechnioNews
  * Community
    * Alumni
    * Generation Next
    * Board of Directors
  * Discover
    * Technology
    * Academic
    * Visit the Campus
    * Information for Students
    * International Collaboration
  * Support Us
    * Donate
    * Tribute Cards
    * Planned Giving
    * Priority Projects

# Technology

# Technion Technological Innovation

Technion is involved in collaborative scientific research and outreach
projects worldwide, nurturing cutting-edge cooperative discovery. Technion’s
organizational flexibility and rapid response time to scientific challenges
has made it a global pioneer in areas including autonomous systems,
communications, nanotechnology, optoelectronics, protein engineering, stem
cells and tissue regeneration, and energy.

Its 52 institutes and centers of excellence boost research on a national and
international level, including those dedicated to space, water, theoretical
physics, life sciences, engineering, architecture, mathematics, medical
sciences, transportation, and nanotechnology.

Following are just some of the breakthroughs that can be attributed to
Technion…

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Cancer-

Research.jpg)

Cancer Research

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Computer-

Science.jpg)

Computer Science

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Environment.jpg)

Environmental Engineering

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Medical-

Research.jpg)

Medical Research

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Defensive-

Technologies.jpg)

Defensive Technologies

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Nano.jpg)

NanoTechnology

# Cancer Research

The Technion is one of the few institutions worldwide that brings together
biology with the physical sciences and engineering, to translate research more
quickly into clinical solutions. Distinguished Professors Ciechanover and
Avram Hershko’s Nobel Prize-winning discovery led to the drug Velcade, for the
treatment of multiple myeloma. Other Technion scientists have made great
strides in identifying biomarkers for early cancer detection, combating drug-
resistant tumors, and developing personalized medicine and targeted drug
delivery. With the launch of the Technion Integrated Cancer Center in 2016,
headed by Profs. Ciechanover and Ze'ev Ronai, its interdisciplinary research
is sure to reach new heights.

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Cancer-

Research.jpg)

More breakthroughs in Cancer Research:

  * **Critical Warning** **:** Associate Professor Daphne Weihs has developed a biomechanical method for determining the metastatic potential of tumors.
  * **Researchers Discover Enzyme Crucial to Tumor** **:** Research by Associate Professor Amir Orian shows that inhibition of the enzyme RNF4 or associated genes could serve as a future treatment for certain tumors.
  * **Nano-Ghost Busters** **:** Working at the cutting edge of cancer research, Professor Marcelle Machluf is reconstructing stem cells to create vesicles that can be used as a targeted drug-delivery vehicle known as “Nano-Ghosts.” The stem cells are emptied of their content (rendering them ghosts) and refilled with treatment (genetic or drugs) that is released upon reaching the targeted tumor. Nano-Ghosts can also carry contrast agents to be used for diagnostics.
  * **Tiny Barcodes Provide a Huge Advance in Personalized Cancer Therapy** : Associate Professor Avi Schroeder is personalizing cancer therapy that allows for the testing of several different anticancer drugs inside a patient’s body, concurrently, to determine which will work best.

# Computer Science

The Technion Faculty of Computer Science is ranked among the best in the
world. If you rely on a computer, it is very likely that your processor was
developed by Technion graduates working at companies such as Intel. Your
online communications are for the most part made possible by the Lempel-Ziv
algorithm, named for the two Technion professors who discovered a way to
compress data. If you use a flash drive, the underlying technology was also
developed by a Technion graduate.

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Computer-

Science.jpg)

More breakthroughs in Computer Science:

  * A computer science student has developed **a computerized learning system that can detect emotional sentiments expressed in a text message or email** based on recognizing repeated word patterns.
  * Two Technion electrical engineering students created “Cart2Go,” **a shopping cart that autonomously tracks and follows its shopper** throughout one store and on to the next, like a faithful puppy.
  * As part of a project, two Technion software engineering students **hacked the popular navigation application Waze** , and caused a traffic jam that lasted for hours. The students’ academic advisors notified Waze of the “cyber-attack” afterward, with the belief that Waze will now **find a way to prevent such attacks from happening in the future**.

# Environmental Engineering

The Technion is a leader in the green technologies that help solve the
enormous environmental challenges facing our world. In Israel, the lack of
natural resources has led to innovations that help provide clean water and
air, alternative energy sources and conservation. If you live in an arid
region, your drinking water may be derived from desalination methods developed
in part at the Technion Grand Water Research Institute. Considering an
electric or alternative fuel vehicle? That too may be powered by technology
created by Technion researchers or graduates of the Grand Technion Energy
Program.

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Environment.jpg)

More breakthroughs in Environmental Engineering:

  * **Hydrogen on Demand** : Technion researchers use solar energy to produce hydrogen fuel safely and at the point of sale. Hydrogen fuel is extremely safe, easy to store, and its only byproduct is water.
  * Future Water Supplies **:** Complementing desalination with two new alternatives—storm water and gray water (relatively clean waste water from baths, sinks, appliances etc.).
  * A mission to find the cleanest place to live near Haifa led alumnus Ran Korber to co-found BreezoMeter.
  * Follow Technion Engineers Without Borders students into Ethiopia as they build a sustainable rainwater harvesting system for a village school.
  * Professor Avner Rothschild’s breakthrough makes it possible to store solar energy at nighttime or on cloudy days.

# Medical Research

Technion researchers have transformed basic science into life-changing
applications. The intersection of engineering and medicine at the Lorry I.
Lokey Interdisciplinary Center for Life Sciences and Engineering has helped
lay the foundation for a thriving medical device industry in Israel. If you
suffer from cancer, heart disease, or Parkinson’s disease, it’s possible that
at least part of your treatment was developed at the Technion. Velcade, for
the treatment of cancer, and Azilect, for the treatment of Parkinson’s, were
invented by Technion scientists.

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Medical-

Research.jpg)

More breakthroughs in Medical Research:

  * **Researchers Suggest New Theory for how Parkinson’s Disease Develops** **:** Associate Professor Simone Engelender came up with a new hypothesis for Parkinson’s that could shift the paradigm on how the disease is viewed and treated.
  * **A Biological Pacemaker** **:** A Canadian-Israeli team of scientists led by Professor Lior Gepstein has developed a biological pacemaker that overcomes many of the limitations of electrical pacemakers.
  * **Breakthrough Improves Chances Tissue Grafts Will Survive and Thrive** **:** A better understanding of the effect of mechanical forces on blood vessel assembly in engineered tissues aids optimal growth of new blood vessels after tissue transplantation. Professor Shulamit Levenberg’s discovery would improve the chances that grafted tissues will survive.
  * **Israeli Medical Startup Develops First Simple Blood Test for Parkinson’s Disease** **:** A blood test underway for diagnosis of the disease is based on Professor Emeritus Moussa Youdim’s pioneering research.
  * Technion biophysicist Professor Kinneret Keren’s findings on how hydra regrow lost body parts might one day be useful for human tissue regeneration.
  * Professor Meytal Landau’s new approach to fighting the superbug could lead to new types of antibiotics.
  * Users demonstrate Technion alumnus Dr. Amit Goffer’s UPnRIDE and ReWalk, mobility devices for quadriplegics and paraplegics.
  * Professor Moshe Shoham, Co-Founder of Mazor Robotics and Microbot Medical and head of the Technion’s Kahn Medical Robotics Laboratory, discusses the renaissance in robotic spine and brain surgery.

# Defensive Technologies

The Technion helps keep Israel—and the world— secure. Its researchers and
graduates are on the cutting edge of new technologies for national defense—on
the ground, in the air, and in cyberspace. Technion technology has thwarted
terrorist attacks on civilians, and saved lives in Israel and throughout the
world. Notably, the Iron Dome anti-missile defense system was developed mainly
by Technion graduates at Rafael Advance Defense Systems, Ltd.

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Defensive-

Technologies.jpg)

More breakthroughs in Defensive Technologies:

  * **IDF and Technion Join Forces to Develop Medical Glider:** The Technion and the Israel Defense Forces are collaborating to develop a medical glider that could save soldiers’ lives by bringing supplies such as blood transfusion kits, antibiotics and intubation kits to the battlefield.
  * **Tough, Flexible Material Could Protect Soldiers and Astronauts:** Inspired by fish scales in nature, Asst. Prof. Stephan Rudykh is helping to develop a revolutionary material that could be used to make bulletproof clothing for the military and spacesuits for astronauts.

# NanoTechnology

Considered futuristic a just a few years ago, nanotechnology - where
scientists utilize nano-sized objects measuring less than 1/100,000 the width
of a human hair -- today is showing great promise in areas such as medicine,
materials science and defense technology. The Technion’s Russell Berrie
Nanotechnology Institute is a world-leader in nanotechnology research having
made seminal discoveries in the field.

![](http://www.technioncanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Nano.jpg)

More breakthroughs in NanoTechology:

  * Prof. Ester Segal and a team of Israeli and American researchers find that **silicon nanomaterials used for the localized delivery of chemotherapy drugs** behave differently in cancerous tumors than they do in healthy tissues. The findings could help scientists better design such materials to facilitate the controlled and targeted release of the chemotherapy drugs to tumors.
  * Associate Professor Alex Leshansky of the Faculty of Chemical Engineering is part of an international team that has **created a tiny screw-shaped propeller that can move in a gel-like fluid, mimicking the environment in a living organism**. The breakthrough brings closer the day robots that are only nanometers – billionths of a meter – in length, can maneuver and perform medicine inside the human body and possibly inside human cells.
  * Prof. Amit Miller and a team of researchers at the Technion and Boston University have discovered **a simple way to control the passage of DNA molecules through nanopore sensors**. The breakthrough could lead to low-cost, ultra-fast DNA sequencing that would revolutionize healthcare and biomedical research, and spark major advances in drug development, preventative medicine and personalized medicine.

  * Privacy Policy

  * Contact

  * _fecebook_

  * _LinkedIn_

© 2018 Technion Canada

__

