

  * __
  * Sections __
  * __
  * Home

The Washington Post logo

Democracy Dies in Darkness

  * Try 1 month for $1
  * Username
  * Sign In

* * *
    
    
    * My Post __
    * My Reading List __
    * Account Settings __
    * Newsletters & alerts __
    * Gift subscriptions __
    * Contact us __
    * Help desk __
    

  * My Post __
  * My Reading List __
  * Account Settings __
  * Newsletters & alerts __
  * Gift subscriptions __
  * Contact us __
  * Help desk __

  * Accessibility for screenreader

Economic Policy

# Stoned drivers are a lot safer than drunk ones, new federal data show

Add to list

In my list

By Christopher Ingraham

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Christopher Ingraham

Reporter covering all things data

Email **Bio __Follow**

February 9, 2015

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/0-A5XHff2VGkjzqeUcdcB82IUgI=/480x0/arc-

anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/SZOF2NOWYYZ3VNS2BYB6CWRFMU.jpg)  
A breath alcohol ignition interlock device. AFP PHOTO/Paul J. Richards

A new study from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration finds that
drivers who use marijuana are at a significantly lower risk for a crash than
drivers who use alcohol. And after adjusting for age, gender, race and alcohol
use, drivers who tested positive for marijuana were no more likely to crash
than who had not used any drugs or alcohol prior to driving.

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/-YmnAsOf-

Aq_mKCeG6-HveLC9to=/480x0/arc-anglerfish-washpost-prod-

washpost.s3.amazonaws.com/public/BS7GZLWOJM5O5MSOD7FMXBLXRY.png)

The chart above tells the story. For marijuana, and for a number of other
legal and illegal drugs including antidepressants, painkillers, stimulants and
the like, there is no statistically significant change in the risk of a crash
associated with using that drug prior to driving. But overall alcohol use,
measured at a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) threshold of 0.05 or above,
increases your odds of a wreck _nearly seven-fold_.

The study's findings underscore an important point: that the measurable
presence of THC (marijuana's primary active ingredient) in a person's system
doesn't correlate with impairment in the same way that blood alcohol
concentration does. The NHTSA doesn't mince words: "At the current time,
specific drug concentration levels cannot be reliably equated with a specific
degree of driver impairment."

There are a whole host of factors why detectable drug presence doesn't
indicate impairment the way it does with alcohol. "Most psychoactive drugs are
chemically complex molecules, whose absorption, action, and elimination from
the body are difficult to predict," the report authors write, "and
considerable differences exist between individuals with regard to the rates
with which these processes occur. Alcohol, in comparison, is more
predictable." In heavy marijuana users, measurable amounts of THC can be
detectable in the body days or even weeks after the last use, and long after
any psychoactive effects remain.

Several states have passed laws attempting to define "marijuana-impaired
driving" similarly to drunk driving. Colorado, for instance, sets a blood THC
threshold of 5 nanograms per milliliter. But that number tells us next to
nothing about whether a person is impaired or fit to drive. The implication is
that these states are locking up people who are perfectly sober.

A companion study released by the NHTSA identified a sharp jump in the number
of weekend night-time drivers testing positive for THC between 2007 and
2013/2014, from 8.6 percent to 12.6 percent. Numbers like these are alarming
at first glance. They generate plenty of thoughtless media coverage. They're
used by marijuana legalization opponents to conjure up the bogeyman of legions
of stoned drivers menacing the nation's roads.

But all these numbers really tell us is that more people are using marijuana
at some point in the days or weeks before they drive. With legalization fully
underway in several states, there's nothing surprising about this. "The change
in use may reflect the emergence of a new trend in the country that warrants
monitoring," the NHTSA study concludes.

So, should we all assume that we're safe to blaze one and go for a joyride
whenever the whimsy strikes us? Absolutely not. There's plenty of evidence
showing that marijuana use impairs key driving skills. If you get really
stoned and then get behind the wheel, you're asking for trouble.

What we do need, however, are better roadside mechanisms for detecting
marijuana-related impairment. Several companies are developing pot
breathalyzers for this purpose.

We also need a lot more research into the effects of marijuana use on driving
ability, particularly to get a better sense of how pot's effect on driving
diminishes in the hours after using. But this kind of research remains
incredibly difficult to do, primarily because the federal government still
classifies weed as a Schedule 1 substance, as dangerous as heroin.

Comments

![](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/yAFxThroW-

CI5t-yu8Q6FsF7kHI=/1x1/www.washingtonpost.com/pb/resources/img/spacer.gif)

Christopher Ingraham Christopher Ingraham writes about all things data. He
previously worked at the Brookings Institution and the Pew Research Center.
Follow __

Market Watch

Dow 26,109.52

Today 0.18%

S&P 2,894.74

Today 0.28%

NASDAQ 7,860.86

Today 0.48%

Last Updated:10:44 AM 06/11/2019

![logo](https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/FCZNCYXcoUN55RbTtYJLNtwZuPk=/288x0/www.washingtonpost.com/resources/img/drawbridge/TWP_logo@2x.png)

Subscriber sign in

### We noticed youâ€™re blocking ads!

Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a
subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on.

Try 1 month for $1

Unblock ads

Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us

![](https://sb.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=3005617&cv=2.0&cj=1)
![](//me.effectivemeasure.net/em_image)

