

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Cigarette

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

This article is about the small paper-wrapped cylindrical object used for
smoking. For other uses, see Cigarette (disambiguation).

"Cig" redirects here. For other uses, see Cig (disambiguation).

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/bb/Cigarette_DS.jpg/220px-

Cigarette_DS.jpg)

An unlit, filtered cigarette

A **cigarette** , also known colloquially as a **fag** in British English, is
a narrow cylinder containing psychoactive material, usually tobacco, that is
rolled into thin paper for smoking. Most cigarettes contain a "reconstituted
tobacco" product known as "sheet", which consists of "recycled [tobacco]
stems, stalks, scraps, collected dust, and floor sweepings", to which are
added glue, chemicals and fillers; the product is then sprayed with nicotine
that was extracted from the tobacco scraps, and shaped into curls.[1] The
cigarette is ignited at one end, causing it to smolder; the resulting smoke is
orally inhaled via the opposite end. Most modern cigarettes are filtered,
although this does not decrease health risks associated with smoking.
Cigarette manufacturers have described cigarettes as a drug administration
system for the delivery of nicotine in acceptable and attractive
form.[2][3][4][5] Cigarettes are addictive (because of nicotine) and cause
cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart disease, and other health
problems.

The term _cigarette_ , as commonly used, refers to a tobacco cigarette but is
sometimes used to refer to other substances, such as a cannabis cigarette. A
cigarette is distinguished from a cigar by its usually smaller size, use of
processed leaf, and paper wrapping, which is typically white. Cigar wrappers
are typically composed of tobacco leaf or paper dipped in tobacco extract.

Smoking rates have generally declined in the developed world, but continue to
rise in developing nations.[6][7][8] Cigarette smoking is associated with
serious health risks; nicotine is also highly addictive. About half of
cigarette smokers die of tobacco-related disease[9] and lose on average 14
years of life.[10] Cigarettes cause between 1 and 1.4 deaths per million
smoked, with a lag period of roughly 25 years.[11][12] According to Dr. Robert
Proctor, the 6 trillion cigarettes smoked in 1990 caused around 1 death every
5 seconds in 2015.[11]

Cigarette use by pregnant women has also been shown to cause birth defects,
including low birth weight, fetal abnormalities, and premature birth.[13]
Second-hand smoke from cigarettes causes many of the same health problems as
smoking, including cancer,[14][15][16][17] which has led to legislation and
policy that has prohibited smoking in many workplaces and public areas.
Cigarette smoke contains over 7,000 chemical compounds, including arsenic,
formaldehyde, cyanide, lead, nicotine, carbon monoxide, acrolein, and other
poisonous substances.[18] Over 70 of these are carcinogenic.[19] Additionally,
cigarettes are a frequent source of mortality-associated fires in private
homes, which prompted both the European Union and the United States to ban
cigarettes that are not fire-standard compliant from 2011 onwards.[20][21]

## Contents

  * 1 History
  * 2 Legislation
    * 2.1 Smoking restrictions
    * 2.2 Smoking age
    * 2.3 Taxation
    * 2.4 Fire-safe cigarette
    * 2.5 Cigarette advertising
    * 2.6 Warning messages in packages
  * 3 Construction
    * 3.1 Paper
    * 3.2 Tobacco blend
    * 3.3 Additives
    * 3.4 Cigarette tube
    * 3.5 Cigarette filter
    * 3.6 Cigarette butt
  * 4 Environmental impact
    * 4.1 Aquatic life health concerns
    * 4.2 Other health concerns
    * 4.3 Degradation
    * 4.4 Biodegradation
    * 4.5 Factors in biodegradation
    * 4.6 Photodegradation
    * 4.7 Solution and remediation projects
  * 5 Consumption
  * 6 Lights
  * 7 Notable cigarette brands
  * 8 Health effects
    * 8.1 Smokers
    * 8.2 Second-hand smoke
  * 9 Smoking cessation
  * 10 Replacement
  * 11 See also
  * 12 Bibliography
  * 13 References
  * 14 Further reading
  * 15 External links

## History

See also: History of tobacco

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/99/Mayan_priest_smoking.jpg/170px-

Mayan_priest_smoking.jpg)

A reproduction of a carving from the temple at Palenque, Mexico, depicting a
Maya deity using a smoking tube

The earliest forms of cigarettes were similar to their predecessor, the cigar.
Cigarettes appear to have had antecedents in Mexico and Central America around
the 9th century in the form of reeds and smoking tubes. The Maya, and later
the Aztecs, smoked tobacco and other psychoactive drugs in religious rituals
and frequently depicted priests and deities smoking on pottery and temple
engravings. The cigarette and the cigar were the most common methods of
smoking in the Caribbean, Mexico, and Central and South America until recent
times.[22]

The North American, Central American, and South American cigarette used
various plant wrappers; when it was brought back to Spain, maize wrappers were
introduced, and by the 17th century, fine paper. The resulting product was
called _papelate_ and is documented in Goya's paintings _La Cometa_ , _La
Merienda en el Manzanares_ , and _El juego de la pelota a pala_ (18th
century).[23]

By 1830, the cigarette had crossed into France, where it received the name
_cigarette_ ; and in 1845, the French state tobacco monopoly began
manufacturing them.[23] The French word was adopted by English in the
1840s.[24] Some American reformers promoted the spelling _cigaret_ ,[25][26]
but this was never widespread and is now largely abandoned.[27]

The first patented cigarette-making machine was invented by Juan Nepomuceno
Adorno of Mexico in 1847.[28] However, production climbed markedly when
another cigarette-making machine was developed in the 1880s by James Albert
Bonsack, which vastly increased the productivity of cigarette companies, which
went from making about 40,000 hand-rolled cigarettes daily to around 4
million.[29]

In the English-speaking world, the use of tobacco in cigarette form became
increasingly widespread during and after the Crimean War, when British
soldiers began emulating their Ottoman Turkish comrades and Russian enemies,
who had begun rolling and smoking tobacco in strips of old newspaper for lack
of proper cigar-rolling leaf.[23] This was helped by the development of
tobaccos suitable for cigarette use, and by the development of the Egyptian
cigarette export industry.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3d/La_cometa.jpg/220px-

La_cometa.jpg)

Francisco Goya's _La Cometa_ , depicting a (foreground left) man smoking an
early quasicigarette

Cigarettes may have been initially used in a manner similar to pipes, cigars,
and cigarillos and not inhaled; for evidence, see the Lucky Strike ad campaign
asking consumers "Do You Inhale?" from the 1930s. As cigarette tobacco became
milder and more acidic, inhaling may have become perceived as more agreeable.
However, Moltke noticed in the 1830s (cf. _Unter dem Halbmond_ ) that Ottomans
(and he himself) inhaled the Turkish tobacco and Latakia from their pipes[30]
(which are both initially sun-cured, acidic leaf varieties).

The widespread smoking of cigarettes in the Western world is largely a 20th-
century phenomenon. At the start of the 20th century, the _per capita_ annual
consumption in the U.S. was 54 cigarettes (with less than 0.5% of the
population smoking more than 100 cigarettes per year), and consumption there
peaked at 4,259 per capita in 1965. At that time, about 50% of men and 33% of
women smoked (defined as smoking more than 100 cigarettes per year).[31] By
2000, consumption had fallen to 2,092 per capita, corresponding to about 30%
of men and 22% of women smoking more than 100 cigarettes per year, and by 2006
per capita consumption had declined to 1,691;[32] implying that about 21% of
the population smoked 100 cigarettes or more per year.

The adverse health effects of cigarettes were known by the mid-19th century
when they became known as _coffins nails._ [33] German doctors were the first
to identify the link between smoking and lung cancer, which led to the first
antitobacco movement in Nazi Germany.[34][35] During World War I and World War
II, cigarettes were rationed to soldiers. During the Vietnam War, cigarettes
were included with C-ration meals. In 1975, the U.S. government stopped
putting cigarettes in military rations. During the second half of the 20th
century, the adverse health effects of tobacco smoking started to become
widely known and text-only health warnings became common on cigarette packets.

The United States has not implemented graphical cigarette warning labels,
which are considered a more effective method to communicate to the public the
dangers of cigarette smoking.[36] Canada, Mexico, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden,
Thailand, Malaysia, India, Pakistan, Australia, Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Peru,[37] Greece, the Netherlands,[ _citation needed_ ] New Zealand, Norway,
Hungary, the United Kingdom, France, Romania, Singapore, Egypt, Nepal and
Turkey, however, have both textual warnings and graphic visual images
displaying, among other things, the damaging effects tobacco use has on the
human body.

The cigarette has evolved much since its conception; for example, the thin
bands that travel transverse to the "axis of smoking" (thus forming circles
along the length of the cigarette) are alternate sections of thin and thick
paper to facilitate effective burning when being drawn, and retard burning
when at rest. Synthetic particulate filters may remove some of the tar before
it reaches the smoker.

The "holy grail" for cigarette companies has been a cancer-free cigarette. On
record, the closest historical attempt was produced by scientist James Mold.
Under the name project TAME, he produced the XA cigarette. However, in 1978,
his project was terminated.[38][39][40]

Since 1950, the average nicotine and tar content of cigarettes has steadily
fallen. Research has shown that the fall in overall nicotine content has led
to smokers inhaling larger volumes per puff.[41]

## Legislation

### Smoking restrictions

Further information: List of smoking bans

Many governments impose restrictions on smoking tobacco, especially in public
areas. The primary justification has been the negative health effects of
second-hand smoke.[42] Laws vary by country and locality. Bhutan is currently
the only country in the world to completely outlaw the cultivation,
harvesting, production, and sale of tobacco and tobacco products under the
Tobacco Control Act of Bhutan 2010. However, small allowances for personal
possession are permitted as long as the possessors can prove that they have
paid import duties.[43] The Pitcairn Islands had previously banned the sale of
cigarettes, but it now permits sales from a government-run store. The Pacific
island of Niue hopes to become the next country to prohibit the sale of
tobacco.[44] Iceland is also proposing banning tobacco sales from shops,
making it prescription-only and therefore dispensable only in pharmacies on
doctor's orders.[45] New Zealand hopes to achieve being tobacco-free by 2025
and Finland by 2040. Singapore and the Australian state of Tasmania have
proposed a 'tobacco free millennium generation initiative' by banning the sale
of all tobacco products to anyone born in and after the year 2000. In March
2012, Brazil became the world's first country to ban all flavored tobacco
including menthols. It also banned the majority of the estimated 600 additives
used, permitting only eight. This regulation applies to domestic and imported
cigarettes. Tobacco manufacturers had 18 months to remove the noncompliant
cigarettes, 24 months to remove the other forms of noncompliant
tobacco.[46][47] Under sharia law, the consumption of cigarettes by Muslims is
prohibited.[48] In the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant the consumption,
and even its possession is illegal.[49]

### Smoking age

Main article: Smoking age

Beginning on April 1, 1998, the sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products
to people under the state purchase age has been prohibited by law in all 50
states of the United States. The purchasing age in the United States is 18 in
42 of the 50 states — but 19 in Alabama, Alaska, Utah, and Nassau, Suffolk,
and Onondaga Counties in New York,[50][51] and 21 in California, Hawaii, New
Jersey, Oregon, Maine[52] and more than 180 municipalities across the nation.
The intended effect of this is to prevent older high school students from
purchasing cigarettes for their younger peers. In Massachusetts,[53] parents
and guardians are allowed to give cigarettes to minors, but sales to minors
are prohibited.

Similar laws exist in many other countries. In Canada, most of the provinces
require smokers to be 19 years of age to purchase cigarettes (except for
Quebec and the prairie provinces, where the age is 18). However, the minimum
age only concerns the purchase of tobacco, not use. Alberta, however, does
have a law which prohibits the possession or use of tobacco products by all
persons under 18, punishable by a $100 fine. Australia, New Zealand, Poland,
and Pakistan have a nationwide ban on the selling of all tobacco products to
people under the age of 18.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/90/Tabak-

Trafik_12.2006.jpg/220px-Tabak-Trafik_12.2006.jpg)

_Tabak-Trafik_ in Vienna: Since 1 January 2007, all cigarette machines in
Austria must attempt to verify a customer's age by requiring the insertion of
a debit card or mobile phone verification.

Since 1 October 2007, it has been illegal for retailers to sell tobacco in all
forms to people under the age of 18 in three of the UK's four constituent
countries (England, Wales, Northern Ireland, and Scotland) (rising from 16).
It is also illegal to sell lighters, rolling papers, and all other tobacco-
associated items to people under 18. It is not illegal for people under 18 to
buy or smoke tobacco, just as it was not previously for people under 16; it is
only illegal for the said retailer to sell the item. The age increase from 16
to 18 came into force in Northern Ireland on 1 September 2008. In the Republic
of Ireland, bans on the sale of the smaller 10-packs and confectionery that
resembles tobacco products (candy cigarettes) came into force on May 31, 2007,
in a bid to cut underaged smoking.

Most countries in the world have a legal vending age of 18. In Macedonia,
Italy, Malta, Austria, Luxembourg, and Belgium, the age for legal vending is
16\. Since January 1, 2007, all cigarette machines in public places in Germany
must attempt to verify a customer's age by requiring the insertion of a debit
card. Turkey, which has one of the highest percentage of smokers in its
population,[54] has a legal age of 18. Japan is one of the highest tobacco-
consuming nations, and requires purchasers to be 20 years of age (suffrage in
Japan is 20 years old).[55] Since July 2008, Japan has enforced this age limit
at cigarette vending machines through use of the taspo smart card. In other
countries, such as Egypt, it is legal to use and purchase tobacco products
regardless of age.[ _citation needed_ ] Germany raised the purchase age from
16 to 18 on the 1 September 2007.

Some police departments in the United States occasionally send an underaged
teenager into a store where cigarettes are sold, and have the teen attempt to
purchase cigarettes, with their own or no ID. If the vendor then completes the
sale, the store is issued a fine.[56] Similar enforcement practices are
regularly performed by Trading Standards officers in the UK, Israel, and the
Republic of Ireland.[57]

### Taxation

See also: Cigarette taxes in the United States

Cigarette sales are a significant source of tax revenue in many localities.
This fact has historically been an impediment for health groups seeking to
discourage cigarette smoking, since governments seek to maximize tax revenues.
Furthermore, some countries have made cigarettes a state monopoly, which has
the same effect on the attitude of government officials outside the health
field.[58]

In the United States, cigarettes are taxed substantially, but the states are a
primary determinant of the total tax rate. Generally, states that rely on
tobacco as a significant farm product tend to tax cigarettes at a low
rate.[59] Higher prices for cigarettes discourage smoking. Every 10% increase
in the price of cigarettes reduced youth smoking by about 7% and overall
cigarette consumption by about 4%.[60] Thus, increased cigarette taxes are
proposed as a means to reduce smoking. Coupled with the federal cigarette tax
of $1.01 per pack, total cigarette-specific taxes range from $1.18 per pack in
Missouri to $8.00 per pack in Silver Bay.

States also charge sizable settlement payments to tobacco companies, and the
federal government levies user fees to fund FDA regulatory measures over
tobacco. While these charges are not cigarette-specific, tobacco companies are
ultimately forced to pass on those costs to their consumers. Lastly, most
jurisdictions apply sales tax to the full retail price of cigarettes.

The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that globally cigarettes be
taxed at a rate of three-quarters of cigarettes sale price as a way of
deterring cancer and other negative health outcomes.[61]

### Fire-safe cigarette

Main article: Fire safe cigarette

According to Simon Chapman, a professor of public health at the University of
Sydney, the burning agents in cigarette paper are responsible for fires and
reducing them would be a simple and effective means of dramatically reducing
the ignition propensity of cigarettes.[62] Since the 1980s, prominent
cigarette manufacturers such as Philip Morris and R.J. Reynolds developed
fire-safe cigarettes, but did not market them.[63]

The burn rate of cigarette paper is regulated through the application of
different forms of microcrystalline cellulose to the paper.[64] Cigarette
paper has been specially engineered by creating bands of different porosity to
create "fire-safe" cigarettes. These cigarettes have a reduced idle burning
speed which allows them to self-extinguish.[65] This fire-safe paper is
manufactured by mechanically altering the setting of the paper slurry.[66]

New York was the first U.S. state to mandate that all cigarettes manufactured
or sold within the state comply with a fire-safe standard. Canada has passed a
similar nationwide mandate based on the same standard. All U.S. states are
gradually passing fire-safe mandates.[67]

The European Union wishes to ban in 2011 cigarettes that are not fire-safe.
According to a study made by the European Union in 16 European countries,
11,000 fires were due to people carelessly handling cigarettes between 2005
and 2007. This caused 520 deaths and 1,600 people injured.[68]

### Cigarette advertising

Main article: Tobacco advertising

In many parts of the world, tobacco advertising and sponsorship has been
outlawed. The ban on tobacco advertising and sponsorship in the EU in 2005 has
prompted Formula One management to look for races in areas that allow the
tobacco-sponsored teams to display their livery. In the United States,
advertising restrictions took effect on June 22, 2010.

In some jurisdictions, such as the Canadian provinces of British Columbia,
Saskatchewan and Alberta, the retail store display of cigarettes is completely
prohibited if persons under the legal age of consumption have access to the
premises.[69] In Ontario, Manitoba, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Quebec,
Canada and the Australian Capital Territory the display of tobacco is
prohibited for everyone, regardless of age, as of 2010. This retail display
ban includes noncigarette products such as cigars and blunt wraps.[70][71]

### Warning messages in packages

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/26/Golden_Gate_by_P%26S.JPG/220px-

Golden_Gate_by_P%26S.JPG)

Cigarette package with large health warning required by law

Main article: Tobacco packaging warning messages

As a result of tight advertising and marketing prohibitions, tobacco companies
look at the pack differently: they view it as a strong component in displaying
brand imagery and a creating significant in-store presence at the point of
purchase. Market testing shows the influence of this dimension in shifting the
consumer's choice when the same product displays in an alternative package.
Studies also show how companies have manipulated a variety of elements in
packs designs to communicate the impression of lower in tar or milder
cigarettes, whereas the components were the same.[72]

Some countries require cigarette packs to contain warnings about health
hazards. The United States was the first,[73] later followed by other
countries including Canada, most of Europe, Australia,[74] Pakistan,[75]
India, Hong Kong, and Singapore. In 1985, Iceland became the first country to
enforce graphic warnings on cigarette packaging.[76][77] At the end of
December 2010, new regulations from Ottawa increased the size of tobacco
warnings to cover three-quarters of the cigarette package in Canada.[78] As of
November 2010, 39 countries have adopted similar legislation.[73]

In February 2011, the Canadian government passed regulations requiring
cigarette packs to contain 12 new images to cover 75% of the outside panel and
eight new health messages on the inside panel with full color.[79]

As of April 2011, Australian regulations require all packs to use a bland
olive green that researchers determined to be the least attractive color,[80]
with 75% coverage on the front of the pack and all of the back consisting of
graphic health warnings. The only feature that differentiates one brand from
another is the product name in a standard color, position, font size, and
style.[81] Similar policies have since been adopted in France and the United
Kingdom.[82][83] In response to these regulations, Philip Morris
International, Japan Tobacco Inc., British American Tobacco Plc., and Imperial
Tobacco attempted to sue the Australian government. On August 15, 2012, the
High Court of Australia dismissed the suit and made Australia the first
country to introduce brand-free plain cigarette packaging with health warnings
covering 90 and 70% of back and front packaging, respectively. This took
effect on December 1, 2012.[84]

## Construction

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/35/Cigarette-

key.svg/220px-Cigarette-key.svg.png)

Diagram of a cigarette  
1\. Mainstream smoke  
2\. Filtration material  
3\. Adhesives  
4\. Ventilation holes  
5\. Ink  
6\. Adhesive  
7\. Sidestream smoke  
8\. Filter  
9\. Tipping Paper  
10\. Tobacco and ingredients  
11\. Paper  
12\. Burning point and ashes

Modern commercially manufactured cigarettes are seemingly simple objects
consisting mainly of a tobacco blend, paper, PVA glue to bond the outer layer
of paper together, and often also a cellulose acetate–based filter.[85] While
the assembly of cigarettes is straightforward, much focus is given to the
creation of each of the components, in particular the tobacco blend. A key
ingredient that makes cigarettes more addictive is the inclusion of
reconstituted tobacco, which has additives to make nicotine more volatile as
the cigarette burns.[86]

### Paper

Main article: Rolling paper

See also: List of rolling papers

The paper for holding the tobacco blend may vary in porosity to allow
ventilation of the burning ember or contain materials that control the burning
rate of the cigarette and stability of the produced ash. The papers used in
tipping the cigarette (forming the mouthpiece) and surrounding the filter
stabilize the mouthpiece from saliva and moderate the burning of the
cigarette, as well as the delivery of smoke with the presence of one or two
rows of small laser-drilled air holes.[87]

### Tobacco blend

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/99/LeonesCigs.JPG/220px-

LeonesCigs.JPG)

Leones Africanos brand cigarettes from the mid-20th century, part of the
permanent collection of the Museo del Objeto del Objeto

The process of blending gives the end product a consistent taste from batches
of tobacco grown in different areas of a country that may change in flavor
profile from year to year due to different environmental conditions.[88]

Modern cigarettes produced after the 1950s, although composed mainly of
shredded tobacco leaf, use a significant quantity of tobacco processing
byproducts in the blend. Each cigarette's tobacco blend is made mainly from
the leaves of flue-cured brightleaf, burley tobacco, and oriental tobacco.
These leaves are selected, processed, and aged prior to blending and filling.
The processing of brightleaf and burley tobaccos for tobacco leaf "strips"
produces several byproducts such as leaf stems, tobacco dust, and tobacco leaf
pieces ("small laminate").[88] To improve the economics of producing
cigarettes, these byproducts are processed separately into forms where they
can then be added back into the cigarette blend without an apparent or marked
change in the cigarette's quality. The most common tobacco byproducts include:

  * Blended leaf (BL) sheet: a thin, dry sheet cast from a paste made with tobacco dust collected from tobacco stemming, finely milled burley-leaf stem, and pectin.[89]
  * Reconstituted leaf (RL) sheet: a paper-like material made from recycled tobacco fines, tobacco stems and "class tobacco", which consists of tobacco particles less than 30 mesh in size (about 0.6 mm) that are collected at any stage of tobacco processing:[90] RL is made by extracting the soluble chemicals in the tobacco byproducts, processing the leftover tobacco fibers from the extraction into a paper, and then reapplying the extracted materials in concentrated form onto the paper in a fashion similar to what is done in paper sizing. At this stage, ammonium additives are applied to make reconstituted tobacco an effective nicotine delivery system.[86]
  * Expanded (ES) or improved stem (IS): ES is rolled, flattened, and shredded leaf stems that are expanded by being soaked in water and rapidly heated. Improved stem follows the same process, but is simply steamed after shredding. Both products are then dried. These products look similar in appearance, but are different in taste.[88]

In recent years, the manufacturers' pursuit of maximum profits has led to the
practice of using not just the leaves, but also recycled tobacco offal[86] and
the plant stem.[91] The stem is first crushed and cut to resemble the leaf
before being merged or blended into the cut leaf.[92] According to data from
the World Health Organization,[93] the amount of tobacco per 1000 cigarettes
fell from 2.28 pounds in 1960 to 0.91 pounds in 1999, largely as a result of
reconstituting tobacco, fluffing, and additives.

A recipe-specified combination of brightleaf, burley-leaf, and oriental-leaf
tobacco is mixed with various additives to improve its flavors.

### Additives

Various additives are combined into the shredded tobacco product mixtures,
with humectants such as propylene glycol or glycerol, as well as flavoring
products and enhancers such as cocoa solids, licorice, tobacco extracts, and
various sugars, which are known collectively as "casings". The leaf tobacco is
then shredded, along with a specified amount of small laminate, expanded
tobacco, BL, RL, ES, and IS. A perfume-like flavor/fragrance, called the
"topping" or "toppings", which is most often formulated by flavor companies,
is then blended into the tobacco mixture to improve the consistency in flavor
and taste of the cigarettes associated with a certain brand name.[88]
Additionally, they replace lost flavors due to the repeated wetting and drying
used in processing the tobacco. Finally, the tobacco mixture is filled into
cigarette tubes and packaged.

A list of 599 cigarette additives, created by five major American cigarette
companies, was approved by the Department of Health and Human Services in
April 1994. None of these additives is listed as an ingredient on the
cigarette pack(s). Chemicals are added for organoleptic purposes and many
boost the addictive properties of cigarettes, especially when burned.[
_citation needed_ ]

One of the classes of chemicals on the list, ammonia salts, convert bound
nicotine molecules in tobacco smoke into free nicotine molecules. This
process, known as freebasing, could potentially increase the effect of
nicotine on the smoker, but experimental data suggests that absorption is, in
practice, unaffected.[94]

### Cigarette tube

Cigarette tubes are prerolled cigarette paper usually with an acetate or paper
filter at the end. They have an appearance similar to a finished cigarette,
but are without any tobacco or smoking material inside. The length varies from
what is known as King Size (84 mm) to 100s (100 mm).[95]

Filling a cigarette tube is usually done with a cigarette injector (also known
as a shooter). Cone-shaped cigarette tubes, known as cones, can be filled
using a packing stick or straw because of their shape. Cone smoking is popular
because as the cigarette burns, it tends to get stronger and stronger. A cone
allows more tobacco to be burned at the beginning than the end, allowing for
an even flavor[96]

The United States Tobacco Taxation Bureau defines a cigarette tube as
"Cigarette paper made into a hollow cylinder for use in making
cigarettes."[97]

### Cigarette filter

Main article: Cigarette filter

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f2/Edit-clear.svg/40px-Edit-

clear.svg.png)

|

**This section should include a summary ofCigarette filter.** See
Wikipedia:Summary style for information on how to incorporate it into this
article's main text. _( July 2017)_

\---|---

### Cigarette butt

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/69/Filthy_Habit_by_SillyPuttyEnemies.jpg/220px-

Filthy_Habit_by_SillyPuttyEnemies.jpg)

A discarded cigarette butt, lying on dirty snow

See also: Ashtray and Cigarette pack § Features

The common name for the remains of a cigarette after smoking is a cigarette
butt. The butt is typically about 30% of the cigarette's original length. It
consists of a tissue tube which holds a filter and some remains of tobacco
mixed with ash. They are the most numerically frequent litter in the
world.[98] Cigarette butts accumulate outside buildings, on parking lots, and
streets where they can be transported through storm drains to streams, rivers,
and beaches.[99] It is also called a fag-end or dog-end.[100]

In a recent trial the city of Vancouver, British Columbia, partnered with
TerraCycle to create a system for recycling of cigarette butts. A reward of 1¢
per collected butt was offered to determine the effectiveness of a deposit
system similar to that of beverage containers.[101][102]

## Environmental impact

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9b/Cellulose_Acetate.png/220px-

Cellulose_Acetate.png)

Simple molecular representation of cellulose acetate with one of the acetate
groups on the cellulose backbone shown by the red circle

Cigarette filters are made up of thousands of polymer chains of cellulose
acetate, which has the chemical structure shown to the right. Once discarded
into the environment, the filters create a large waste problem. Cigarette
filters are the most common form of litter in the world, as approximately 5.6
trillion cigarettes are smoked every year worldwide.[103] Of those, an
estimated 4.5 trillion cigarette filters become litter every year.[104] To
develop an idea of the waste weight amount produced a year the table below was
created.

Estimated waste produced from filters Number of filters | weight  
\---|---  
1 pack (20) | 0.12 ounces (3.4 g)  
sold daily (15 billion) | 5,625,000 pounds (2,551,000 kg)  
sold yearly (5.6 trillion) | 2,100,000,000 pounds (950,000,000 kg)  
estimated trash (4.5 trillion) | 1,687,500,000 pounds (765,400,000 kg)

Discarded cigarette filters usually end up in the water system through
drainage ditches and are transported by rivers and other waterways to the
ocean.

### Aquatic life health concerns

In the 2006 International Coastal Cleanup, cigarettes and cigarette butts
constituted 24.7% of the total collected pieces of garbage, over twice as many
as any other category, which is not surprising seeing the numbers in the table
above of waste produced each year.[105] Cigarette filters contain the
chemicals filtered from cigarettes and can leach into waterways and water
supplies.[106] The toxicity of used cigarette filters depends on the specific
tobacco blend and additives used by the cigarette companies. After a cigarette
is smoked, the filter retains some of the chemicals, and some of which are
considered carcinogenic.[98] When studying the environmental impact of
cigarette filters, the various chemicals that can be found in cigarette
filters are not studied individually, due to its complexity. Researchers
instead focus on the whole cigarette filter and its LD50. LD50 is defined as
the lethal dose that kills 50% of a sample population. This allows for a
simpler study of the toxicity of cigarettes filters. One recent study has
looked at the toxicity of smoked cigarette filters (smoked filter + tobacco),
smoked cigarette filters (no tobacco), and unsmoked cigarette filters (no
tobacco). The results of the study showed that for the LD50of both marine
topsmelt ( _Atherinops affinis_ ) and freshwater fathead minnow ( _Pimephales
promelas_ ), smoked cigarette filters + tobacco are more toxic than smoked
cigarette filters, but both are severely more toxic than unsmoked cigarette
filters.[107]

LD50 of cigarette filters to marine life (cigarette per liter) Cigarette type
| Marine topsmelt | Fathead minnow  
\---|---|---  
Smoked cigarette filter (smoked filter + tobacco) | 1.0 | 1.0  
Smoked cigarette filters (no tobacco) | 1.8 | 4.3  
Unsmoked cigarette filters (no tobacco) | 5.1 | 13.5

### Other health concerns

Toxic chemicals are not the only human health concern to take into
considerations; the others are cellulose acetate and carbon particles that are
breathed in while smoking. These particles are suspected of causing lung
damage.[108] The next health concern is that of plants. Under certain growing
conditions, plants on average grow taller and have longer roots than those
exposed to cigarette filters in the soil. A connection exists between
cigarette filters introduced to soil and the depletion of some soil nutrients
over a period time. Another health concern to the environment is not only the
toxic carcinogens that are harmful to the wildlife, but also the filters
themselves pose an ingestion risk to wildlife that may presume filter litter
as food.[109] The last major health concern to make note of for marine life is
the toxicity that deep marine topsmelt and fathead minnow pose to their
predators. This could lead to toxin build-up (bioaccumulation) in the food
chain and have long reaching negative effects. Smoldering cigarette filters
have also been blamed for triggering fires from residential areas[110] to
major wildfires and bushfires which has caused major property damage and also
death[111][112][113] as well as disruption to services by triggering alarms
and warning systems.[114]

### Degradation

Once in the environment, cellulose acetate can go through biodegradation and
photodegradation.[115][116][117] Several factors go into determining the rate
of both degradation process. This variance in rate and resistance to
biodegradation in many conditions is a factor in littering[118] and
environmental damage.[119]

### Biodegradation

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/2/2b/Chemical_hydrolysis.png/400px-

Chemical_hydrolysis.png)

Chemical hydrolysis of cellulose acetate

The first step in the biodegradation of cellulose acetate is the deactylation
of the acetate from the polymer chain (which is the opposite of acetylation).
An acetate is a negative ion with the chemical formula of C2H3O2−.
Deacetylation can be performed by either chemical hydrolysis or
acetylesterase. Chemical hydrolysis is the cleavage of a chemical bond by
addition of water. In the reaction, water (H2O) reacts with the acetic ester
functional group attached the cellulose polymer chain and forms an alcohol and
acetate. The alcohol is simply the cellulose polymer chain with the acetate
replaced with an alcohol group. The second reaction is exactly the same as
chemical hydrolysis with the exception of the use of an acetylesterase enzyme.
The enzyme, found in most plants, catalyzes the chemical reaction shown
below.[120]

    
    
    acetic ester + H2O ⇌ alcohol + acetate
    

In the case of the enzymatic reaction, the two substrates (reactants) are
again acetic ester and H2O, the two products of the reaction are alcohol and
acetate. This reaction is exactly the same as the chemical hydrolysis. Both of
these products are perfectly fine in the environment. Once the acetate group
is removed from the cellulose chain, the polymer can be readily degraded by
cellulase, which is another enzyme found in fungi, bacteria, and protozoans.
Cellulases break down the cellulose molecule into monosaccharides ("simple
sugars") such as beta-glucose, or shorter polysaccharides and
oligosaccharides.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a9/Cellulos_to_glycose.png/400px-

Cellulos_to_glycose.png)

The chemical structure change of cellulose into glucose

These simple sugars are not harmful to the environment and are in fact are a
useful product for many plants and animals. The breakdown of cellulose is of
interest in the field of biofuel.[121] Due to the conditions that affect the
process, large variation in the degradation time of cellulose acetate occurs.

### Factors in biodegradation

The duration of the biodegradation process is cited as taking as little as one
month[115] to as long as 15 years or more, depending on the environmental
conditions. The major factor that affects the biodegradation duration is the
availability of acetylesterase and cellulase enzymes. Without these enzymes,
biodegradation only occurs through chemical hydrolysis and stops there.
Temperature is another major factor, if the organisms that contain the enzymes
are too cold to grow, then biodegradation is severely hindered. Availability
of oxygen in the environment also affects the degradation. Cellulose acetate
is degraded within 2–3 weeks under aerobic assay systems of _in vitro_
enrichment cultivation techniques and an activated sludge wastewater treatment
system.[122] It is degraded within 14 weeks under anaerobic conditions of
incubation with special cultures of fungi.[123] Ideal conditions were used for
the degradation (i.e. right temperature, and available organisms to provide
the enzymes). Thus, filters last longer in places with low oxygen
concentration (ex. swamps and bogs). Overall, the biodegraditon process of
cellulose acetate is not an instantaneous process.

### Photodegradation

The other process of degradation is photodegradation, which is when a
molecular bond is broken by the absorption of photon radiation (i.e. light).
Due to cellulose acetate carbonyl groups, the molecule naturally absorbs light
at 260 nm,[124] but it contains some impurities which can absorb light. These
impurities are known to absorb light in the far UV light region (< 280
nm).[125] The atmosphere filters radiation from the sun and allows radiation
of > 300 nm only to reach the surface. Thus, the primary photodegradation of
cellulose acetate is considered insignificant to the total degradation
process, since cellulose acetate and its impurities absorb light at shorter
wavelengths. Research is focused on the secondary mechanisms of
photodegradation of cellulose acetate to help make up for some of the
limitations of biodegradation. The secondary mechanisms would be the addition
of a compound to the filters that would be able to absorb natural light and
use it to start the degradation process. The main two areas of research are in
photocatalytic oxidation[126] and photosensitized degradation.[127]
Photocatalytic oxidation uses a species that absorbs radiation and creates
hydroxyl radicals that react with the filters and start the breakdown.
Photosensitized degradation, though, uses a species that absorbs radiation and
transfers the energy to the cellulose acetate to start the degradation
process. Both processes use other species that absorbed light > 300 nm to
start the degradation of cellulose acetate.[ _citation needed_ ]

### Solution and remediation projects

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/64/Buttout.jpg/220px-

Buttout.jpg)

A cigarette disposal canister, encouraging the public to dispose of their
cigarettes properly

Several options are available to help reduce the environmental impact of
cigarette butts. Proper disposal into receptacles leads to decreased numbers
found in the environment and their effect on the environment. Another method
is making fines and penalties for littering filters; many governments have
sanctioned stiff penalties for littering of cigarette filters; for example,
Washington imposes a penalty of $1,025 for littering cigarette filters.[128]
Another option is developing better biodegradable filters; much of this work
relies heavily on the research in the secondary mechanism for photodegradation
as stated above, but a new research group has developed an acid tablet that
goes inside the filters, and once wet enough, releases acid that speeds up the
degradation to around two weeks.[129] The research is still only in test phase
and the hope is soon it will go into production. The next option is using
cigarette packs with a compartment in which to discard cigarette butts,
implementing monetary deposits on filters, increasing the availability of butt
receptacles, and expanding public education. It may even be possible to ban
the sale of filtered cigarettes altogether on the basis of their adverse
environmental impact.[130] Recent research has been put into finding ways to
use the filter waste to develop a desired product. One research group in South
Korea has developed a simple one-step process that converts the cellulose
acetate in discarded cigarette filters into a high-performing material that
could be integrated into computers, handheld devices, electrical vehicles, and
wind turbines to store energy. These materials have demonstrated superior
performance as compared to commercially available carbon, grapheme, and carbon
nanotubes. The product is showing high promise as a green alternative for the
waste problem.[131]

## Consumption

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c3/Cigarettecounter_pd.jpg/220px-

Cigarettecounter_pd.jpg)

A Woolworths supermarket cigarette counter in New South Wales, Australia: In
January 2011, Australia prohibited the display of cigarettes in retail outlets
countrywide.[132]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d3/Mall_culture_jakarta43.jpg/220px-

Mall_culture_jakarta43.jpg)

Cigarette salesgirls and a salesman in Jakarta, Indonesia

As of 2002, about 5.5 trillion cigarettes were produced globally, and were
smoked by over 1.1 billion people, or greater than one-seventh of the world
population. While smoking rates have leveled off or declined in developed
nations, they continue to rise in developing parts of the world. Smoking rates
in the United States have dropped by more than half from 1965 to 2016, falling
from 42% to 15.5% of US adults.[133] In the developing world, tobacco
consumption is rising by 3.4% per year. Smoking rates in Australia have
dropped 4.9% in the year that ended in March 2014. Consumption of cigarettes
and tobacco dropped 7.6% in the first quarter in Australia, and 0.1% of the
nation's gross domestic product was clipped from the cut in household
consumption of cigarettes. Australia is cutting their overall smoking
consumption faster than most of the developed world, in part due to landmark
legislation passed banning logos on cigarette cartons, and instead replacing
labels with graphic images of sick or dying cigarette smokers and dire health
warnings in front of the images. This legislation, passed in 2011, is called
Australia's Plain Packaging Act, and was fought in the country's High Court by
manufacturers of tobacco products. The legislation has significantly reduced
consumption in Australia,[ _citation needed_ ] and could serve as precedent
for many other governments currently expanding restrictive legislation on
cigarette and tobacco use. An independent review made by one of Britain's most
prominent doctors, Cyril Chantler, may be one of the first steps for Britain
to follow Australia in cutting its overall household consumption. In his
report, he notes that “standardized packaging would serve to reduce the rate
of children taking up smoking.” Ireland's health minister, James Reilly, has
said the government has passed a draft bill in 2014 on plain packaging. In New
Zealand, a bill has been presented to parliament in which the government's
associate health minister said “takes away the last means of promoting tobacco
as a desirable product.”[134]

Smoking prevalence by sex (2000) | Percent smoking  
\---|---  
Region | Men | Women  
Africa | 29% | 4%  
United States | 35% | 22%  
Eastern Mediterranean | 35% | 4%  
Europe | 46% | 26%  
Southeast Asia | 44% | 4%  
Western Pacific | 60% | 8%

Source: World Health Organization estimates, 2000

Leading consumers of cigarettes (1998)[135] Country | Population  
(millions) | Cigarettes consumed  
(billions) | Cigarettes consumed  
(per capita)  
\---|---|---|---  
China | 1,248 | 1,643 | 1,320  
USA | 270 | 451 | 1,670  
Japan | 126 | 328 | 2,600  
Russia | 146 | 258 | 1,760  
Indonesia | 200 | 215 | 1,070  
Smoking prevalence in the U.S. (2006)[136] Rank | State | % | Rank | State | %
| Rank | State | % | Rank | State | %  
\---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1 | KY | 28.6 | 14 | SC | 22.3 | 27 | KS | 20.0 | 40 | AZ | 18.1  
2 | WV | 25.7 | 15 | NV | 22.2 | 28 | GA | 20.0 | 41 | VT | 18.0  
3 | OK | 25.7 | 16 | NC | 22.1 | 29 | ND | 19.6 | 42 | DC | 17.9  
4 | MS | 25.1 | 17 | DE | 21.7 | 30 | VA | 19.3 | 43 | CO | 17.9  
5 | AK | 24.2 | 18 | WY | 21.6 | 31 | RI | 19.3 | 44 | MA | 17.8  
6 | IN | 24.1 | 19 | PA | 21.5 | 32 | MT | 19.0 | 45 | MD | 17.8  
7 | AR | 23.7 | 20 | IA | 21.5 | 33 | NH | 18.7 | 46 | HI | 17.5  
8 | LA | 23.4 | 21 | FL | 21.0 | 34 | NE | 18.6 | 47 | WA | 17.1  
9 | MO | 23.3 | 22 | ME | 20.9 | 35 | OR | 18.5 | 48 | CT | 17.0  
10 | AL | 23.3 | 23 | WI | 20.8 | 36 | NY | 18.3 | 49 | ID | 16.8  
11 | TN | 22.6 | 24 | IL | 20.5 | 37 | MN | 18.3 | 50 | CA | 14.9  
12 | OH | 22.5 | 25 | SD | 20.4 | 38 | TX | 18.1 | 51 | UT | 9.8  
13 | MI | 22.4 | 26 | NM | 20.2 | 39 | NJ | 18.1 | | |

## Lights

Main article: Lights (cigarette type)

Cigarettes labeled as “Lights”, “Milds”, or “Low-tar” are considered to have a
“lighter”, less pronounced flavor than regular cigarettes.[ _citation needed_
] These cigarette brands may also contain lower levels of tar, nicotine, or
other chemicals inhaled by the smoker.[137] The filter design is one of the
main differences between light and regular cigarettes, although not all
cigarettes contain perforated holes in the filter anymore. In some light
cigarettes, the filter is perforated with small holes that theoretically
diffuse the tobacco smoke with clean air. In regular cigarettes, the filter
does not include these perforations. In ultralight cigarettes, the filter's
perforations are larger, and in theory, these larger holes produce an even
smaller smoke-to-air ratio.

The majority of major cigarette manufacturers offer a light, low-tar, and/or
mild cigarette brand. Due to recent U.S. legislation prohibiting the use of
these descriptors, tobacco manufacturers are turning to color-coding to allow
consumers to differentiate between regular and light brands.[138]

The scientific evidence is that switching from regular to light or low-tar
cigarettes does not reduce the health risks of smoking or lower the smoker's
exposure to the nicotine, tar, and carcinogens present in cigarette
smoke.[139][140][141]

## Notable cigarette brands

Main article: List of cigarette brands

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9c/Marlboro4wiki2.JPG/220px-

Marlboro4wiki2.JPG)

Marlboro, one of the most well-known cigarette brands.

  * 520
  * 555
  * Ashford
  * Amber Leaf
  * American Spirit
  * Army Club
  * Ardath
  * Basic
  * Bel Air
  * Benson & Hedges
  * Berkeley
  * Camel
  * Capri
  * Chesterfield
  * Davidoff
  * Dunhill
  * Djarum
  * Doral
  * du Maurier
  * Eclipse
  * Embassy
  * Eve
  * Export A
  * Fatima
  * Fortuna
  * Gauloises
  * Gitanes
  * Gold Flake
  * Golden Virginia
  * Gold Leaf
  * Kyriazi Freres
  * Kent
  * Kool
  * Lambert and Butler
  * L&M
  * Lark
  * Lucky Strike
  * Marlboro
  * Max
  * Mayfair
  * Merit
  * Mild Seven
  * More
  * Nat Sherman
  * Natural American Spirit
  * Newport
  * Next
  * Nil
  * Old Gold
  * Pall Mall
  * Parliament
  * Perilly's
  * Peter Stuyvesant
  * Peter Jackson
  * Philip Morris
  * Pyramid
  * Player's
  * Prince
  * Raleigh
  * Ronhill
  * Salem
  * Sampoerna
  * Seneca
  * Senior Service
  * Smokin Joes
  * Sobranie
  * Sovereign
  * Sterling
  * Surya
  * Tareyton
  * Vantage
  * Viceroy
  * Virginia Slims
  * West
  * Woodbine
  * Windsor Blue
  * Winfield
  * Winston

## Health effects

### Smokers

Main article: Health effects of tobacco

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/80/MODOArtistas.jpg/220px-

MODOArtistas.jpg)

Artistas brand cigarette package of Mexico from the Museo del Objeto del
Objeto collection

Nicotine, the primary psychoactive chemical in cigarettes, is highly
addictive.[142] The resulting use of tobacco is the single greatest cause of
preventable death globally.[143] Smoking leads most commonly to diseases
affecting the heart, liver, and lungs, being a major risk factor for heart
attacks, strokes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (including
emphysema and chronic bronchitis), and cancer (particularly lung cancer,
cancers of the larynx and mouth, and pancreatic cancer). It also causes
peripheral vascular disease and hypertension. On average, each cigarette
smoked is estimated to shorten life by 11 minutes.[10][144][145] Starting
smoking earlier in life and smoking cigarettes higher in tar increases the
risk of these diseases. The World Health Organization estimates that tobacco
caused 5.4 million deaths in 2004[146] and 100 million deaths over the course
of the 20th century.[147] Cigarettes produce an aerosol containing over 4,000
chemical compounds, including nicotine, carbon monoxide, acrolein, and oxidant
substances.[18] Over 70 of these are carcinogens.[19]

The most important chemical compounds causing cancer are those that produce
DNA damage since such damage appears to be the primary underlying cause of
cancer.[148][149] Cunningham et al.[150] combined the microgram weight of the
compound in the smoke of one cigarette with the known genotoxic effect per
microgram to identify the most carcinogenic compounds in cigarette smoke. The
seven most important carcinogens in tobacco smoke are shown in the table,
along with DNA alterations they cause.

**The mostgenotoxic cancer causing chemicals in cigarette smoke** Compound |
Micrograms per cigarette | Effect on DNA | Ref.  
\---|---|---|---  
Acrolein | 122.4 | Reacts with deoxyguanine and forms DNA crosslinks, DNA-
protein crosslinks and DNA adducts | [151]  
Formaldehyde | 60.5 | DNA-protein crosslinks causing chromosome deletions and
re-arrangements | [152]  
Acrylonitrile | 29.3 | Oxidative stress causing increased
8-oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine | [153]  
1,3-butadiene | 105.0 | Global loss of DNA methylation (an epigenetic effect)
as well as DNA adducts | [154]  
Acetaldehyde | 1448.0 | Reacts with deoxyguanine to form DNA adducts | [155]  
Ethylene oxide | 7.0 | Hydroxyethyl DNA adducts with adenine and guanine |
[156]  
Isoprene | 952.0 | Single and double strand breaks in DNA | [157]

"Ulcerative colitis is a condition of nonsmokers in which nicotine is of
therapeutic benefit."[158] A recent review of the available scientific
literature concluded that the apparent decrease in Alzheimer disease risk may
be simply because smokers tend to die before reaching the age at which it
normally occurs. "Differential mortality is always likely to be a problem
where there is a need to investigate the effects of smoking in a disorder with
very low incidence rates before age 75 years, which is the case of Alzheimer's
disease", it stated, noting that smokers are only half as likely as nonsmokers
to survive to the age of 80.[159]

### Second-hand smoke

Second-hand smoke is a mixture of smoke from the burning end of a cigarette
and the smoke exhaled from the lungs of smokers. It is involuntarily inhaled,
lingers in the air for hours after cigarettes have been extinguished, and can
cause a wide range of adverse health effects, including cancer, respiratory
infections, and asthma.[160] Nonsmokers who are exposed to second-hand smoke
at home or work increase their heart disease risk by 25–30% and their lung
cancer risk by 20–30%. Second-hand smoke has been estimated to cause 38,000
deaths per year, of which 3,400 are deaths from lung cancer in
nonsmokers.[161] Sudden infant death syndrome, ear infections, respiratory
infections, and asthma attacks can occur in children who are exposed to
second-hand smoke.[162][163][164] Scientific evidence shows that no level of
exposure to second-hand smoke is safe.[162][163]

## Smoking cessation

Main article: Smoking cessation

Smoking cessation (quitting smoking) is the process of discontinuing the
practice of inhaling a smoked substance.[165]

Smoking cessation can be achieved with or without assistance from healthcare
professionals or the use of medications.[166] Methods that have been found to
be effective include interventions directed at or through health care
providers and health care systems; medications including nicotine replacement
therapy (NRT) and varenicline; individual and group counselling; and web-based
or stand-alone computer programs. Although stopping smoking can cause short-
term side effects such as reversible weight gain, smoking cessation services
and activities are cost-effective because of the positive health benefits.

At the University of Buffalo, researchers found out that fruit and vegetable
consumption can help a smoker cut down or even quit smoking[167]

  * A growing number of countries have more ex-smokers than smokers.[168]
  * Early "failure" is a normal part of trying to stop, and more than one attempt at stopping smoking prior to longer-term success is common.[166]
  * NRT, other prescribed pharmaceuticals, and professional counselling or support also help many smokers.[166]
  * However, up to three-quarters of ex-smokers report having quit without assistance ("cold turkey" or cut down then quit), and cessation without professional support or medication may be the most common method used by ex-smokers.[166]

Tobacco contains nicotine. Smoking cigarettes can lead to nicotine
addiction.[169]:2300–2301 The addiction begins when nicotine acts on nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors to release neurotransmitters such as dopamine,
glutamate, and gamma-aminobutyric acid.[169]:2296 Cessation of smoking leads
to symptoms of nicotine withdrawal such as anxiety and irritability.[169]:2298
Professional smoking cessation support methods generally endeavour to address
both nicotine addiction and nicotine withdrawal symptoms.

The number of nicotinic receptors in the brain returns to the level of a
nonsmoker between 6 and 12 weeks after quitting.[170]

## Replacement

Main article: Electronic cigarette

Further information: Safety of electronic cigarettes and Composition of
electronic cigarette aerosol

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f0/Eri_merkkisia_sahkotupakoita.jpg/280px-

Eri_merkkisia_sahkotupakoita.jpg)

Various types of electronic cigarettes.

An electronic cigarette is a handheld battery-powered vaporizer that simulates
smoking by providing some of the behavioral aspects of smoking, including the
hand-to-mouth action of smoking, but without combusting tobacco.[171] Using an
e-cigarette is known as "vaping" and the user is referred to as a
"vaper."[172] Instead of cigarette smoke, the user inhales an aerosol,
commonly called vapor.[173] E-cigarettes typically have a heating element that
atomizes a liquid solution called e-liquid.[174] The user automatically
activates the e-cigarette by taking a puff;[175] other devices turn on
manually by pressing a button.[172] Some e-cigarettes look like traditional
cigarettes,[176] but they come in many variations.[172] Most versions are
reusable, though some are disposable.[177] There are first-generation,[178]
second-generation,[179] third-generation,[180] and fourth-generation
devices.[181] E-liquids usually contain propylene glycol, glycerin, nicotine,
flavorings, additives, and differing amounts of contaminants.[182] E-liquids
are also sold without propylene glycol,[183] nicotine,[184] or flavors.[185]

The benefits and the health risks of e-cigarettes are
uncertain.[186][187][188] There is tentative evidence they may help people
quit smoking,[189] although they have not been proven to be more effective
than smoking cessation medicine.[190] There is concern with the possibility
that non-smokers and children may start nicotine use with e-cigarettes at a
rate higher than anticipated than if they were never created.[191] Following
the possibility of nicotine addiction from e-cigarette use, there is concern
children may start smoking cigarettes.[191] Youth who use e-cigarettes are
more likely to go on to smoke cigarettes.[192][193] Their part in tobacco harm
reduction is unclear,[194] while another review found they appear to have the
potential to lower tobacco-related death and disease.[195] Regulated US Food
and Drug Administration nicotine replacement products may be safer than
e-cigarettes,[194] but e-cigarettes are generally considered safer than
tobacco.[196][197] It is estimated their safety risk to users is similar to
that of smokeless tobacco.[198] The long-term effects of e-cigarette use are
unknown.[199][200][201] The risk from serious adverse events is low.[202] Less
serious adverse effects include abdominal pain, headache, blurry vision,[203]
throat and mouth irritation, vomiting, nausea, and coughing.[204] Nicotine
itself is associated with some health concerns.[178]

E-cigarettes create vapor made of fine and ultrafine particles of particulate
matter,[204] which have been found to contain propylene glycol, glycerin,
nicotine, flavors, tiny amounts of toxicants,[204] carcinogens,[205] heavy
metals, and metal nanoparticles, and other substances.[204] Its exact
composition varies across and within manufacturers, and depends on the
contents of the liquid, the physical and electrical design of the device, and
user behavior, among other factors.[173] E-cigarette vapor potentially
contains harmful chemicals not found in tobacco smoke.[206] E-cigarette vapor
contains fewer toxic chemicals,[204] and lower concentrations of potential
toxic chemicals than cigarette smoke.[207] The vapor is probably much less
harmful to users and bystanders than cigarette smoke,[205] although concern
exists that the exhaled vapor may be inhaled by non-users, particularly
indoors.[208]

## See also

  *   * Cigarette camp

  * History of commercial tobacco in the United States
  * List of additives in cigarettes
  * List of cigarette smoke carcinogens
  * Smoking culture
  * Tobacco smoking

|

Similar products

  * Beedi
  * Cigarillo
  * Herbal cigarette
  * Kretek
  * Shag (tobacco)
  * Electronic cigarette

\---|---

## Bibliography

  * Wilder, Natalie; Daley, Claire; Sugarman, Jane; Partridge, James (April 2016). "Nicotine without smoke: Tobacco harm reduction". UK: Royal College of Physicians. pp. 1–191.
  * "Electronic nicotine delivery systems" (PDF). World Health Organization. 21 July 2014. pp. 1–13.

## References

  1. **^** Rabinoff, Michael; Caskey, Nicholas; Rissling, Anthony; Park, Candice (November 2007). "Pharmacological and Chemical Effects of Cigarette Additives". _American Journal of Public Health_. **97** (11): 1981–1991. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2005.078014. PMC 2040350. PMID 17666709.
  2. **^** Hurt, RD; Robertson, CR (7 October 1998). "Prying open the door to the tobacco industry's secrets about nicotine: the Minnesota Tobacco Trial". _JAMA_. **280** (13): 1173–81. doi:10.1001/jama.280.13.1173. PMID 9777818.
  3. **^** Cummings, KM (September 2015). "Is it not time to reveal the secret sauce of nicotine addiction?". _Tobacco Control_. **24** (5): 420–1. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2015-052631. PMID 26293383.
  4. **^** Teague, CE (1972). _Research planning memorandum on the nature of the tobacco business and the crucial role of the nicotine therein_. Bates: 500915683–500915691: R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company.
  5. **^** Dunn, W (1977). _Smoker psychology program review_. Bates: 1000046538–1000046546: Philip Morris Tobacco Company.
  6. **^** "Cigarette Smoking Among Adults - United States, 2006". Cdc.gov. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  7. **^** "WHO/WPRO-Smoking Statistics". Wpro.who.int. 2002-05-28. Archived from the original on November 8, 2009. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  8. **^** "Home". _The Tobacco Atlas_.
  9. **^** Doll, R.; Peto, R.; Boreham, J.; Sutherland, I. (2004). "Mortality in relation to smoking: 50 years' observations on male British doctors". _BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.)_. **328** (7455): 1519. doi:10.1136/bmj.38142.554479.AE. PMC 437139. PMID 15213107.
  10. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-12-29. Retrieved 2009-11-13.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Proctor, Robert N (2012-02-16). "The history of the discovery of the cigarette–lung cancer link: evidentiary traditions, corporate denial, global toll: Table 1". _Tobacco Control_. **21** (2): 87–91. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2011-050338. ISSN 0964-4563.
  12. **^** Cohen, Bernard L. (September 1991). "Catalog of Risks Extended and Updated". _Health Physics_. **61** (3): 317–335. doi:10.1097/00004032-199109000-00002. ISSN 0017-9078.
  13. **^** "Smoking While Pregnant Causes Finger, Toe Deformities". _Science Daily_. Retrieved March 6, 2007.
  14. **^** "WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2005-02-27. Retrieved 2009-01-12. "Parties recognize that scientific evidence has unequivocally established that exposure to tobacco has the potential to cause death, disease and disability"
  15. **^** "The Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A Report of the Surgeon General". Surgeon General of the United States. 2006-06-27. Retrieved 2014-06-16. "Secondhand smoke exposure causes disease and premature death in children and adults who do not smoke"
  16. **^** Board, California Environmental Protection Agency: Air Resources (2005-06-24). "Proposed Identification of Environmental Tobacco Smoke as a Toxic Air Contaminant". California Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved 2009-01-12.
  17. **^** "Tobacco Smoke and Involuntary Smoking" (PDF). International Agency for Research on Cancer. 2004. Retrieved 2009-01-12. "There is sufficient evidence that involuntary smoking (exposure to secondhand or 'environmental' tobacco smoke) has the potential to cause lung cancer in humans"
  18. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Csordas, Adam; Bernhard, David (2013). "The biology behind the atherothrombotic effects of cigarette smoke". _Nature Reviews Cardiology_. **10** (4): 219–230. doi:10.1038/nrcardio.2013.8. ISSN 1759-5002. PMID 23380975.
  19. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Tobacco Smoking" (PDF). _Personal Habits and Indoor Combustions_. **100E**. International Agency for Research on Cancer. 2012. p. 44.
  20. **^** "Les cigarettes anti-incendie seront obligatoires en 2011". _L'Express.fr_ (in French). L'Expansion. AFP. Archived from the original on February 23, 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2010. "According to a study made by European union in 16 European countries, 11,000 fires were due to cigarettes between 2005 and 2007. They caused 520 deaths and 1600 injuries."
  21. **^** "European Union Pushes for Self-Extinguishing Cigarettes". _Deutsche Welle_. Deutsche Welle. Retrieved January 2, 2010.
  22. **^** Robicsek, Francis _Smoke_ ; _Ritual Smoking in Central America_ pp. 30–37
  23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Goodman, Jordan Elliot (1993). _Tobacco in history: the cultures of dependence_. New York: Routledge. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-415-04963-4.
  24. **^** _Oxford English Dictionary_ , _s.v._
  25. **^** Circulars of Information of the Bureau of Education, _The Spelling Reform_ , No. 7-1880, 1881, p. 25
  26. **^** Henry Gallup Paine, Simplified Spelling Board, _Handbook of Simplified Spelling, New York, 1920,p. 6_
  27. **^** Google Books Ngram Viewer for _cigaret_ vs. _cigarette_ in US and British corpora
  28. **^** "Patents for inventions. Abridgments of specifications". 29 December 1870 - via Google Books.
  29. **^** James, Randy (2009-06-15). "A Brief History Of Cigarette Advertising". TIME. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  30. **^** "Projekt Gutenberg-DE - SPIEGEL ONLINE - Nachrichten - Kultur". Gutenberg.spiegel.de. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  31. **^** "Tobacco Use, United States 1990-1999". _Oncology (Williston Park)_. **13** (12). December 1999.
  32. **^** Tobacco Outlook Report, Economic Research Service, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture
  33. **^** "Definition of COFFIN NAIL".
  34. **^** Roffo, A. H. (January 8, 1940). "Krebserzeugende Tabakwirkung [Carcingogenic effects of tobacco"] (in German). Berlin: J. F. Lehmanns Verlag. Retrieved 2009-09-13.
  35. **^** Proctor, R. N. (2006). "Angel H Roffo: The forgotten father of experimental tobacco carcinogenesis". _Bulletin of the World Health Organization_. **84** (6): 494–496. doi:10.2471/BLT.06.031682. PMC 2627373. PMID 16799735.
  36. **^** Hammond D, Fong GT, McNeill A, Borland R, Cummings KM (June 2006). "Effectiveness of cigarette warning labels in informing smokers about the risks of smoking: findings from the International Tobacco Control (ITC) Four Country Survey". _Tob Control_. 15 Suppl 3 (Suppl 3): iii19–25. doi:10.1136/tc.2005.012294. PMC 2593056. PMID 16754942.
  37. **^** ccpa.unc.edu
  38. **^** Storr, Will (2012-09-06). "Quest for a safer cigarette". _The Daily Telegraph_. London.
  39. **^** "Project XA".
  40. **^** "Safer cigarette history".
  41. **^** Hoffmann, D; Hoffmann, D (March 1997). "The changing cigarette, 1950-1995". _Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health_. **50** (4): 307–364. doi:10.1080/009841097160393. PMID 9120872.
  42. **^** WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control; First international treaty on public health, adopted by 192 countries and signed by 168. Its Article 8.1 states, "Parties recognize that scientific evidence has unequivocally established that exposure to tobacco causes death, disease and disability."
  43. **^** Gayatri Parameswaran. "Bhutan smokers huff and puff over tobacco ban - Features". Al Jazeera English. Retrieved 2013-01-02.
  44. **^** Marks, Kathy (2008-07-09). "World's smallest state aims to become the first smoke-free paradise island - Australasia - World". London: The Independent. Retrieved 2013-01-02.
  45. **^** Helen Pidd (2011-07-04). "What a drag … Iceland considers prescription-only cigarettes | World news". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 2013-01-02.
  46. **^** "WHO | Brazil - Flavoured cigarettes banned". Who.int. 2012-03-13. Retrieved 2013-01-02.
  47. **^** "Eyes on Trade: Brazil's flavored cigarette ban now targeted". Citizen.typepad.com. 2012-04-16. Retrieved 2013-01-02.
  48. **^** Dubai: The Complete Residents' Guide - Page 27, 2006
  49. **^** Gelvin, James (2015). _The Arab Uprisings_. p. 139.
  50. **^** "NJ Office of the Governor - Press Releases - Codey Signs Two Major Bills into Law, Scoring Public Health Triumph for New Jersey". State.nj.us. Archived from the original on April 13, 2008. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  51. **^** News 10 Now (19 December 2006), "Lawmakers raise minimum age on purchasing tobacco products". Retrieved December 19, 2006.
  52. **^** Rumer, Andy (August 11, 2017). "Why Some States Are Raising the Age to Buy Tobacco". _Time_. Retrieved 31 August 2018.
  53. **^** Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 270 (Crimes Against Public Health), Section 6 (Tobacco; sale or gift to minors)
  54. **^** "Total adult smokers by country". NationMaster.com. Retrieved 2008-06-04.
  55. **^** "CIA - The World Factbook - Japan". Cia.gov. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  56. **^** [1] Archived March 26, 2009, at the Wayback Machine
  57. **^** "UK | England | Bristol/Somerset | Retailers sell tobacco to youths". BBC News. 2005-09-01. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  58. **^** "U.S. Aided Cigarette Firms in Conquests Across Asia". Washingtonpost.com. 1996-11-17. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  59. **^** "State Excise Tax Rates On Cigarettes (January 1, 2007)". Taxadmin.org. Archived from the original on November 9, 2009. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  60. **^** "Higher Cigarette Taxes". Tobaccofreekids.org. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  61. **^** "Closing in on cancer". _The Economist_. Retrieved 2017-09-25.
  62. **^** "European Union Pushes for Self-Extinguishing Cigarettes". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 2009-01-01.
  63. **^** O'Connell, Vanessa (2004-04-23). "U.S. Suit Alleges Philip Morris Hid Cigarette-Fire Risk". Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 2019-02-24. "Philip Morris began examining ways to make cigarettes less likely to cause fires in the early 1980s. The research initially was dubbed Project Hamlet, a joking reference to the line "to burn or not to burn," the company confirms."
  64. **^** "Smoking article wrapper for controlling burn rate and method for making same - Philip Morris Incorporated". Freepatentsonline.com. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  65. **^** "NFPA :: Safety Information :: For consumers :: Causes :: Smoking :: Coalition for Fire-Safe Cigarettes". Firesafecigarettes.org. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  66. **^** "Method and apparatus for making banded smoking article wrappers - US Patent 5342484 Full Text". Patentstorm.us. Archived from the original on 2008-05-12. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  67. **^** "States that have passed fire-safe cigarette laws". Fire Safe Cigarettes. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  68. **^** "Les cigarettes anti-incendie seront obligatoires en 2011" (in French). Lexpansion.com. Archived from the original on 2009-02-23. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  69. **^** "A legal history of smoking in Canada". CBC News. 2012-11-09. Retrieved 2014-12-29. "On Jan. 19, 2005, The Supreme Court of Canada rules that Saskatchewan can reinstate a controversial law that forces store owners to keep tobacco products behind curtains or doors. The so-called "shower curtain law" was passed in 2002 to hide cigarettes from children, but was struck down a year later by an appeals court."
  70. **^** "Ontario set to ban cigarette display cases". CTV News. 2008-04-20. Archived from the original on 2009-02-12. Retrieved 2009-01-31. "The new ban prevents all tobacco products from being displayed in any way and prohibits customers from even touching them before they're paid for."
  71. **^** "A Proposal to Regulate the Display and Promotion of Tobacco and Tobacco-Related Products at Retail". Hc-sc.gc.ca. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  72. **^** Binesh, Fatemeh (2011). "The Importance of Cigarette Pack as Brand Image". Archived from the original on 2014-02-27.
  73. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Harris, Gardiner (November 10, 2010). "F.D.A. Unveils Proposed Graphic Warning Labels for Cigarette Packs". _The New York Times_.
  74. **^** Scollo, Michelle; Haslam, Indra (2008). A12.1.1.3 Pictorial warnings in force since 2006. Tobacco in Australia. Cancer Council Victoria. Retrieved 2010-07-23.
  75. **^** Warning on cigarette pack. Tobacco in Pakistan.
  76. **^** "Iceland Tough On Cigarettes – Sun Sentinel". Articles.sun-sentinel.com. 1985-09-17. Retrieved 2013-01-02.
  77. **^** Bardi, Jason (2012-11-16). "Cigarette Pack Health Warning Labels in US Lag Behind World". _Tobacco Control_. **23** (1): e2. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2012-050541. PMC 3725195. PMID 23092884. Retrieved 2013-01-02.
  78. **^** Ottawa to increase size of tobacco warning to cover 3/4 of cigarette package https://vancouversun.com/health/Ottawa+increase+size+tobacco+warnings/4039002/story.html[ _permanent dead link_ ]
  79. **^** "Story of a shattered life: A single childhood incident pushed Dawn Crey into a downward spiral | Vancouver Sun". 2001-11-24. Retrieved February 19, 2011.[ _dead link_ ]
  80. **^** "Tobacco Plain Packaging Regulations 2011". _Australian Government Federal Register of Legislation_. 2013-08-08. 2.2.1 (2)  & passim. Retrieved 2018-03-29.
  81. **^** "Australia unveils tough new cigarette pack rules". Channel NewsAsia. 2011-04-07. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  82. **^** "The world's ugliest colour has been revealed". _The Independent_. 2016-06-11. Retrieved 2016-06-19.
  83. **^** "This new law could save your life". _The Independent_. 2016-05-20. Retrieved 2016-06-19.
  84. **^** "Australia's Top Court Backs Plain-Pack Tobacco Laws". _Bloomberg_. August 15, 2012.
  85. **^** Clean Virginia Waterways, Cigarette Butt Litter - Cigarette Filters, Longwood University. Retrieved October 31, 2006.
  86. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Wigand, J.S. _Additives, Cigarette Design and Tobacco Product Regulation_ , A Report To: World Health Organization, Tobacco Free Initiative, Tobacco Product Regulation Group, Kobe, Japan, 28 June-2 July 2006
  87. **^** "Composite List of Ingredients in Non-Tobacco Materials". Archived from the original on May 24, 2008. www.jti.com. Retrieved November 2, 2006.
  88. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ David E. Merrill, (1994), _"How cigarettes are made"_. Video presentation at Philip Morris USA, Richmond offices. Retrieved October 31, 2006.
  89. **^** "Legacy Tobacco Documents Library". G2public.library.ucsf.edu. Archived from the original on February 12, 2009. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  90. **^** Grant Gellatly, "Method and apparatus for coating reconstituted tobacco".. Retrieved November 2, 2006.
  91. **^** David Pemberton, "Spies, Smoking  & Radiation Sickness". Archived from the original on 2014-02-25.
  92. **^** STS Archived January 12, 2009, at the Wayback Machine
  93. **^** "13 Manufacturing Tobacco". Archived from the original on December 3, 2011.. Retrieved May 11, 2011.
  94. **^** Seeman, Jeffrey I.; Carchman, Richard A. (2008). "The possible role of ammonia toxicity on the exposure, deposition, retention, and the bioavailability of nicotine during smoking". _Food and Chemical Toxicology_. **46** (6): 1863–81. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2008.02.021. PMID 18450355.
  95. **^** "How to Roll Your Own Filter Cigarettes: 6 Steps (with Pictures)". wikihow.com. Archived from the original on 2014-02-22. Retrieved 2014-02-14.[ _self-published source?_ ]
  96. **^** "Zig-Zag Filtered Cigarette Tubes, RYO Magazine, The Magazine of Roll Your Own Cigarettes, Reviews, the Premier filter tube, filtered cigarettes". ryomagazine.com. Retrieved 2014-02-14.
  97. **^** "Forms Tutorial: Glossary Text Version". ttb.gov. Archived from the original on 2013-05-08. Retrieved 2014-02-14.
  98. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Warne, M. St. J.; Warne, M. St. J.; Pablo, F.; Patra, R. (2005). "Variation in, and Causes of, Toxicity of Cigarette Butts to a Cladoceran and Microtox". _Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology_. **50** (2): 205–212. doi:10.1007/s00244-004-0132-y. PMID 16328625.
  99. **^** Kathleen M. Register. "Cigarette Butts as Litter—Toxic as Well as Ugly", Longwood University. Retrieved 28 June 2011. First published in _Underwater Naturalist_ , Volume 25, Number 2, August 2000.
  100. **^** The Nelson contemporary English dictionary - Page 187, W. T. Cunningham - 1977
  101. **^** "Penny for your butts? Vancouver group pushes cigarette-butt recycling plan". _CTVNews_. Retrieved 30 May 2015.
  102. **^** City of Vancouver (2013-11-13). "City and TerraCycle launch cigarette butt collection and recycling program". Retrieved 30 May 2015.
  103. **^** Novotny TE, Lum K, Smith E, et al. (2009). "Cigarettes butts and the case for an environmental policy on hazardous cigarette waste". _International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health_. **6** (5): 1691–705. doi:10.3390/ijerph6051691. PMC 2697937. PMID 19543415.
  104. **^** "The world litters 4.5 trillion cigarette butts a year. Can we stop this?". The Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 2014-09-16.
  105. **^** "International Coastal Cleanup 2006 Report, page 8" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 26, 2008. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  106. **^** "CigaretteLitter.org". Archived from the original on 2007-05-22. Retrieved 2007-05-28.
  107. **^** Slaughter E, Gersberg RM, Watanabe K, Rudolph J, Stransky C, Novotny TE (2011). "Toxicity of cigarette butts, and their chemical components, to marine and freshwater fish". _Tobacco Control_. **20** (Suppl_1): 25–29. doi:10.1136/tc.2010.040170. PMC 3088407. PMID 21504921.
  108. **^** Pauly JL, Mepani AB, Lesses JD, Cummings KM, Streck RJ (March 2002). "Cigarettes with defective filters marketed for 40 years: what Philip Morris never told smokers". _Tob Control_. **11** (Suppl 1): I51–61. doi:10.1136/tc.11.suppl_1.i51. PMC 1766058. PMID 11893815. " **Table 1** Chronology of events related to the marketing of cigarettes filters in the USA, and filter fiber and carbon particle "fall-out" assays of Phillip Morris, Inc Date Milestones and documents"
  109. **^** Dahlberg ER (April 11, 2006). "Cigarette Filters With Vegetation, soil, and Subterranean Environment". Saint Paul, Minnesota: Hamline University.
  110. **^** "Cigarette butt 'causes $1m house fire '". News.smh.com.au. 2008-09-14. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  111. **^** "The Facts About Cigarette Butts and Litter - Fire Danger". CigaretteLitter.Org. Archived from the original on 2009-07-08. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  112. **^** Perkin, Corrie (2009-02-09). "Cigarette butt blamed for West Bendigo fire; two dead, 50 homes lost | Victoria". News.com.au. Archived from the original on February 25, 2009. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  113. **^** "Can cigarette butts start bushfires? - NSW Fire Brigades". Nswfb.nsw.gov.au. 2007-06-21. Archived from the original on 2009-10-17. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  114. **^** "Discarded cigarette butt causes airport chaos - ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)". Abc.net.au. 2009-01-15. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  115. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "British American Tobacco - Cigarettes". Bat.com. Archived from the original on March 3, 2012. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  116. **^** "Kicking butts". Retrieved 2014-09-16.
  117. **^** Puls J, Wilson SA, Holter D (2011). "Degradation of Cellulose Acetate-Based Materials: A Review". _Journal of Polymers and the Environment_. **19** : 152–165. doi:10.1007/s10924-010-0258-0.
  118. **^** Ceredigion County Council Archived January 8, 2009, at the Wayback Machine
  119. **^** "Bulletin of the American Littoral Society, Volume 26, Number 2, August 2000". Longwood.edu. Retrieved 2009-11-13.
  120. **^** Gou, JY; Miller, LM; Hou, G; Yu, XH; Chen, XY; Liu, CJ (January 2012). "Acetylesterase-mediated deacetylation of pectin impairs cell elongation, pollen germination, and plant reproduction". _Plant Cell_. **24** (1): 50–65. doi:10.1105/tpc.111.092411. PMC 3289554. PMID 22247250. [ _dead link_ ]
  121. **^** "Breaking Down Cellulose". _large.stanford.edu_.
  122. **^** Buchanan CM, Garder RM, Komarek RJ (1993). "Aerobic biodegradation of cellulose acetate". _Journal of Applied Polymer Science_. **47** (10): 1709–1719. doi:10.1002/app.1993.070471001.
  123. **^** Rivard CJ, Adney WS, Himmel ME, Mitchell DJ, Vinzant TB, Grohmann K, Moens L, Chum H (1992). "Effects of Natural Polymer Acetlation on the anaerobic Dioconversion to Methane and Carbon Dioxide". _Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology_. 34/35: 725–736. doi:10.1007/bf02920592.
  124. **^** Hon NS (1977). "Photodegradation of Cellulose Acetate Fibers". _Journal of Polymer Science Part A: Polymer Chemistry_. **15** (3): 725–744. Bibcode:1977JPoSA..15..725H. doi:10.1002/pol.1977.170150319.
  125. **^** Hosono K, Kanazawa A, Mori H, Endo T (2007). "Photodegradation of Cellulose Acetate film in the presence of bensophenone as a photosensitizer". _Journal of Applied Polymer Science_. **105** (6): 3235–3239. doi:10.1002/app.26386.
  126. **^** "Study on Photocatalytic Oxidation (PCO) Raises Questions About Formaldehyde as a Byproduct in Indoor Air". Archived from the original on 26 April 2015. Retrieved 30 May 2015.
  127. **^** "photosensitization - chemistry". _Encyclopædia Britannica_. Retrieved 30 May 2015.
  128. **^** "Accidents, fires: Price of littering goes beyond fines". Washington: State of Washington Department of Ecology. 2004-06-01. Archived from the original on 2009-10-12. Retrieved 2009-05-06.
  129. **^** "No more butts: biodegradable filters a step to boot litter problem". Environmental Health News. 2012-08-14.
  130. **^** Novotny, Thomas; Lum, Kristen; Smith, Elizabeth; Wang, Vivian; Barnes, Richard (2009). "Cigarette Butts and the Case for an Environmental Policy on Hazardous Cigarette Waste". _International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health_. **6** (5): 1691–1705. doi:10.3390/ijerph6051691. PMC 2697937. PMID 19543415.
  131. **^** Minzae L, Gil-Pyo K, Hyeon DS, Soomin P, Jongheop Y (2014). "Preparation of energy storage material derived from a used cigarette filter for a supercapacitor electrode". _Nanotechnology_. **25** (34): 34. Bibcode:2014Nanot..25H5601L. doi:10.1088/0957-4484/25/34/345601. PMID 25092115.
  132. **^** Willingham, Richard (31 Dec 2010). "Tobacco display ban from tomorrow". _The Age(Melbourne)_. Fairfax Media. Retrieved 2012-06-28.
  133. **^** "Tobacco Merchant Account". _Allied Payments_. 2019-05-21. Retrieved 2018-05-25.
  134. **^** Innis, Michelle (11 June 2014). "Australia's Graphic Cigarette Pack Warnings Appear to Work" - via NYTimes.com.
  135. **^** Cigarette numbers from WHO [2], population from: China: China Population Information and Research Center (estimate?)"Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original on 2015-04-21. Retrieved 2008-08-02.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link), USA: US Census estimate [3] Archived 2013-10-04 at the Wayback Machine, Japan: National Statistics Center intercensal estimate [4], Russia: Population Reference Bureau [5] Archived 2008-05-27 at the Wayback Machine, Indonesia: average of 1995 and 2000 figures from Statistics Indonesia "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original on 2015-04-21. Retrieved 2008-08-02.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link), all accessed on 2 August 2008. Per capita consumption given to 3 significant figures.
  136. **^** Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (September 2007). "State-specific prevalence of cigarette smoking among adults and quitting among persons aged 18-35 years--United States, 2006". _MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep_. **56** (38): 993–6. PMID 17898692.
  137. **^** "NICOTINE, TAR, AND CO CONTENT OF DOMESTIC CIGARETTES". Retrieved 5 October 2011.
  138. **^** Koch 2009
  139. **^** U.S. National 2004
  140. **^** Benowitz 2005, p. 1
  141. **^** NCI’s Smoking 2007, p.7
  142. **^** "Why is it so hard to quit?". Heart.org. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  143. **^** World Health Organization (2008). _WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic 2008: The MPOWER Package_ (PDF). Geneva: World Health Organization. ISBN 978-92-4-159628-2.[ _page needed_ ]
  144. **^** "HEALTH | Cigarettes 'cut life by 11 minutes '". BBC News. 1999-12-31. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  145. **^** "Time for a smoke? One cigarette reduces your life by 11 minutes". BMJ. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  146. **^** World Health Organization (2008). _The Global Burden of Disease_ (2004 Update ed.). Geneva: World Health Organization. ISBN 978-92-4-156371-0.
  147. **^** "WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2008.
  148. **^** Kastan MB (2008). "DNA damage responses: mechanisms and roles in human disease: 2007 G.H.A. Clowes Memorial Award Lecture". _Mol. Cancer Res_. **6** (4): 517–24. doi:10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0020. PMID 18403632.
  149. **^** Bernstein C, Prasad AR, Nfonsam V, Bernstein H. (2013). DNA Damage, DNA Repair and Cancer, New Research Directions in DNA Repair, Prof. Clark Chen (Ed.), ISBN 978-953-51-1114-6, InTech, http://www.intechopen.com/books/new-research-directions-in-dna-repair/dna-damage-dna-repair-and-cancer[ _page needed_ ]
  150. **^** Cunningham FH, Fiebelkorn S, Johnson M, Meredith C (2011). "A novel application of the Margin of Exposure approach: segregation of tobacco smoke toxicants". _Food Chem. Toxicol_. **49** (11): 2921–33. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2011.07.019. PMID 21802474.
  151. **^** Liu XY, Zhu MX, Xie JP (2010). "Mutagenicity of acrolein and acrolein-induced DNA adducts". _Toxicol. Mech. Methods_. **20** (1): 36–44. doi:10.3109/15376510903530845. PMID 20158384.
  152. **^** Speit G, Merk O (2002). "Evaluation of mutagenic effects of formaldehyde in vitro: detection of crosslinks and mutations in mouse lymphoma cells". _Mutagenesis_. **17** (3): 183–7. doi:10.1093/mutage/17.3.183. PMID 11971987.
  153. **^** Pu X, Kamendulis LM, Klaunig JE (2009). "Acrylonitrile-induced oxidative stress and oxidative DNA damage in male Sprague-Dawley rats". _Toxicol. Sci_. **111** (1): 64–71. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfp133. PMC 2726299. PMID 19546159.
  154. **^** Koturbash I, Scherhag A, Sorrentino J, Sexton K, Bodnar W, Swenberg JA, Beland FA, Pardo-Manuel Devillena F, Rusyn I, Pogribny IP (2011). "Epigenetic mechanisms of mouse interstrain variability in genotoxicity of the environmental toxicant 1,3-butadiene". _Toxicol. Sci_. **122** (2): 448–56. doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfr133. PMC 3155089. PMID 21602187.
  155. **^** Garcia CC, Angeli JP, Freitas FP, Gomes OF, de Oliveira TF, Loureiro AP, Di Mascio P, Medeiros MH (2011). "[13C2]-Acetaldehyde promotes unequivocal formation of 1,N2-propano-2'-deoxyguanosine in human cells". _J. Am. Chem. Soc_. **133** (24): 9140–3. doi:10.1021/ja2004686. PMID 21604744.
  156. **^** Tompkins EM, McLuckie KI, Jones DJ, Farmer PB, Brown K (2009). "Mutagenicity of DNA adducts derived from ethylene oxide exposure in the pSP189 shuttle vector replicated in human Ad293 cells". _Mutat. Res_. **678** (2): 129–37. doi:10.1016/j.mrgentox.2009.05.011. PMID 19477295.
  157. **^** Fabiani R, Rosignoli P, De Bartolomeo A, Fuccelli R, Morozzi G (2007). "DNA-damaging ability of isoprene and isoprene mono-epoxide (EPOX I) in human cells evaluated with the comet assay". _Mutat. Res_. **629** (1): 7–13. doi:10.1016/j.mrgentox.2006.12.007. PMID 17317274.
  158. **^** Green, J. T.; Richardson, C.; Marshall, R. W.; Rhodes, J.; McKirdy, H. C.; Thomas, G. A.; Williams, G. T. (2000). "Nitric oxide mediates a therapeutic effect of nicotine in ulcerative colitis". _Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics_. **14** (11): 1429–1434. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2036.2000.00847.x. PMID 11069313.
  159. **^** Almeida OP, Hulse GK, Lawrence D, Flicker L (2002). "Smoking as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease: contrasting evidence from a systematic review of case-control and cohort studies". _Addiction_. **97** (1): 15–28. doi:10.1046/j.1360-0443.2002.00016.x. PMID 11895267.
  160. **^** "Secondhand Smoke". American Lung Association. June 2007. Archived from the original on October 16, 2009. Retrieved 2012-05-06.
  161. **^** " "Tobacco-Free Florida", _Centers for Disease Control & Prevention Fact Sheets_". Tobaccofreefloridanewsroom.com. Retrieved 2013-01-02.
  162. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Secondhand Smoke". Cancer.org. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  163. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Secondhand Smoke and Cancer - National Cancer Institute". Cancer.gov. 2005-08-18. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  164. **^** "CDC - Fact Sheet - Secondhand Smoke Facts - Smoking  & Tobacco Use". Cdc.gov. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
  165. **^** "Guide to quitting smoking". American Cancer Society. 2011-01-31. Archived from the original on 2010-06-27. Retrieved 2011-02-15.
  166. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Chapman S, MacKenzie R (2010-02-09). "The global research neglect of unassisted smoking cessation: causes and consequences". _PLoS Medicine_. **7** (2): e1000216. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000216. PMC 2817714. PMID 20161722.
  167. **^** Chan, Amanda L. (2012-06-10). "Fruits And Vegetables May Help Smokers Quit -- And Stay Off -- Tobacco". _Huffington Post_.
  168. **^** Chapman, Simon; MacKenzie, Ross (February 9, 2010). "The Global Research Neglect of Unassisted Smoking Cessation: Causes and Consequences". _PLoS Medicine_. **7** (2): e1000216. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000216. PMC 2817714. PMID 20161722.
  169. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Benowitz NL; Benowitz, Neal L. (2010). "Nicotine addiction". _N Engl J Med_. **362** (24): 2295–303. doi:10.1056/NEJMra0809890. PMC 2928221. PMID 20554984.
  170. **^** "Abstinent Smokers' Nicotinic Receptors Take More Than a Month to Normalize".
  171. **^** Caponnetto, Pasquale; Campagna, Davide; Papale, Gabriella; Russo, Cristina; Polosa, Riccardo (2012). "The emerging phenomenon of electronic cigarettes". _Expert Review of Respiratory Medicine_. **6** (1): 63–74. doi:10.1586/ers.11.92. ISSN 1747-6348. PMID 22283580.
  172. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Orellana-Barrios, Menfil A.; Payne, Drew; Mulkey, Zachary; Nugent, Kenneth (2015). "Electronic cigarettes-a narrative review for clinicians". _The American Journal of Medicine_. **128** (7): 674–81. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2015.01.033. ISSN 0002-9343. PMID 25731134.
  173. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Cheng, T. (2014). "Chemical evaluation of electronic cigarettes". _Tobacco Control_. **23** (Supplement 2): ii11–ii17. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013-051482. ISSN 0964-4563. PMC 3995255. PMID 24732157.
  174. **^** Weaver, Michael; Breland, Alison; Spindle, Tory; Eissenberg, Thomas (2014). "Electronic Cigarettes". _Journal of Addiction Medicine_. **8** (4): 234–240. doi:10.1097/ADM.0000000000000043. ISSN 1932-0620. PMC 4123220. PMID 25089953.
  175. **^** Rahman MA, Hann N, Wilson A, Worrall-Carter L (2014). "Electronic cigarettes: patterns of use, health effects, use in smoking cessation and regulatory issues". _Tob Induc Dis_. **12** (1): 21. doi:10.1186/1617-9625-12-21. PMC 4350653. PMID 25745382. CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)
  176. **^** Pepper, J. K.; Brewer, N. T. (2013). "Electronic nicotine delivery system (electronic cigarette) awareness, use, reactions and beliefs: a systematic review". _Tobacco Control_. **23** (5): 375–384. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013-051122. ISSN 0964-4563. PMC 4520227. PMID 24259045.
  177. **^** Cite error: The named reference `DropeCahn2017` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  178. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bhatnagar, A.; Whitsel, L.P.; Ribisl, K.M.; Bullen, C.; Chaloupka, F.; Piano, M.R.; Robertson, R.M.; McAuley, T.; Goff, D.; Benowitz, N. (24 August 2014). "Electronic Cigarettes: A Policy Statement From the American Heart Association". _Circulation_. **130** (16): 1418–1436. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000107. PMID 25156991.
  179. **^** Hayden McRobbie (2014). "Electronic cigarettes" (PDF). National Centre for Smoking Cessation and Training. pp. 1–16.
  180. **^** Farsalinos KE, Spyrou A, Tsimopoulou K, Stefopoulos C, Romagna G, Voudris V (2014). "Nicotine absorption from electronic cigarette use: Comparison between first and new-generation devices". _Scientific Reports_. **4** : 4133. doi:10.1038/srep04133. PMC 3935206. PMID 24569565.
  181. **^** Konstantinos Farsalinos. "Electronic cigarette evolution from the first to fourth generation and beyond" (PDF). _gfn.net.co_. Global Forum on Nicotine. p. 23. Retrieved 23 September 2015.
  182. **^** Cite error: The named reference `England2015` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  183. **^** Oh, Anne Y.; Kacker, Ashutosh (December 2014). "Do electronic cigarettes impart a lower potential disease burden than conventional tobacco cigarettes?: Review on e-cigarette vapor versus tobacco smoke". _The Laryngoscope_. **124** (12): 2702–2706. doi:10.1002/lary.24750. PMID 25302452.
  184. **^** Cite error: The named reference `LeducQuoix2016` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  185. **^** Wilder 2016, p. 82.
  186. **^** Ebbert, Jon O.; Agunwamba, Amenah A.; Rutten, Lila J. (2015). "Counseling Patients on the Use of Electronic Cigarettes". _Mayo Clinic Proceedings_. **90** (1): 128–134. doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2014.11.004. ISSN 0025-6196. PMID 25572196.
  187. **^** Siu, A.L. (22 September 2015). "Behavioral and Pharmacotherapy Interventions for Tobacco Smoking Cessation in Adults, Including Pregnant Women: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement". _Annals of Internal Medicine_. **163** (8): 622–34. doi:10.7326/M15-2023. PMID 26389730.
  188. **^** Harrell, P.T.; Simmons, V.N.; Correa, J.B.; Padhya, T.A.; Brandon, T.H. (4 June 2014). "Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems ("E-cigarettes"): Review of Safety and Smoking Cessation Efficacy". _Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery_. **151** (3): 381–393. doi:10.1177/0194599814536847. PMC 4376316. PMID 24898072.
  189. **^** McRobbie, Hayden; Bullen, Chris; Hartmann-Boyce, Jamie; Hajek, Peter; McRobbie, Hayden (2014). "Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation and reduction". _The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews_. **12** (12): CD010216. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD010216.pub2. PMID 25515689.
  190. **^** Cite error: The named reference `McDonough2015` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  191. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ WHO 2014, p. 6.
  192. **^** Cite error: The named reference `SGUSFactSheet2016` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  193. **^** Stratton 2018, p. Summary, 16.
  194. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Drummond, M.B.; Upson, D (February 2014). "Electronic cigarettes: Potential harms and benefits". _Annals of the American Thoracic Society_. **11** (2): 236–42. doi:10.1513/annalsats.201311-391fr. PMC 5469426. PMID 24575993.
  195. **^** M., Z.; Siegel, M (February 2011). "Electronic cigarettes as a harm reduction strategy for tobacco control: a step forward or a repeat of past mistakes?". _Journal of public health policy_. **32** (1): 16–31. doi:10.1057/jphp.2010.41. PMID 21150942.
  196. **^** Cite error: The named reference `KnorstBenedetto2014` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  197. **^** Cite error: The named reference `Burstyn2014` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  198. **^** Caponnetto P.; Russo C.; Bruno C.M.; Alamo A.; Amaradio M.D.; Polosa R. (March 2013). "Electronic cigarette: a possible substitute for cigarette dependence". _Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease_. **79** (1): 12–19. doi:10.4081/monaldi.2013.104. PMID 23741941.
  199. **^** Cite error: The named reference `Hartmann-BoyceMcRobbie2016` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  200. **^** Cite error: The named reference `BradyDeLaRosa2019` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  201. **^** Cite error: The named reference `BalsBoyd2019` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  202. **^** Cite error: The named reference `PaleyEchalier2016` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  203. **^** Cite error: The named reference `BrelandSpindle2014` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 
  204. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ Grana, R; Benowitz, N; Glantz, SA (13 May 2014). "E-cigarettes: a scientific review". _Circulation_. **129** (19): 1972–86. doi:10.1161/circulationaha.114.007667. PMC 4018182. PMID 24821826.
  205. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hajek, P; Etter, JF; Benowitz, N; Eissenberg, T; McRobbie, H (31 July 2014). "Electronic cigarettes: review of use, content, safety, effects on smokers and potential for harm and benefit" (PDF). _Addiction_. **109** (11): 1801–10. doi:10.1111/add.12659. PMC 4487785. PMID 25078252.
  206. **^** Hildick-Smith, Gordon J.; Pesko, Michael F.; Shearer, Lee; Hughes, Jenna M.; Chang, Jane; Loughlin, Gerald M.; Ipp, Lisa S. (2015). "A Practitioner's Guide to Electronic Cigarettes in the Adolescent Population". _Journal of Adolescent Health_. **57** : 574–9. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2015.07.020. ISSN 1054-139X. PMID 26422289.
  207. **^** Fernández, Esteve; Ballbè, Montse; Sureda, Xisca; Fu, Marcela; Saltó, Esteve; Martínez-Sánchez, Jose M. (2015). "Particulate Matter from Electronic Cigarettes and Conventional Cigarettes: a Systematic Review and Observational Study". _Current Environmental Health Reports_. **2** (4): 423–9. doi:10.1007/s40572-015-0072-x. ISSN 2196-5412. PMID 26452675.
  208. **^** Cite error: The named reference `Rom2014` was invoked but never defined (see the help page). 

## Further reading

  * Bogden JD, Kemp FW, Buse M, et al. (January 1981). "Composition of tobaccos from countries with high and low incidences of lung cancer. I. Selenium, polonium-210, Alternaria, tar, and nicotine". _J. Natl. Cancer Inst_. **66** (1): 27–31. doi:10.1093/jnci/66.1.27. PMID 6935462.
  * Hecht SS (July 1999). "Tobacco smoke carcinogens and lung cancer". _J. Natl. Cancer Inst_. **91** (14): 1194–210. doi:10.1093/jnci/91.14.1194. PMID 10413421.
  * Zhou, Xun Yu; Gilman, Sander L. (2004). _Smoke: a global history of smoking_. London: Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1-86189-200-3.
  * Matuszko, Jan (November 2006). "Tobacco Products Processing Detailed Study" (PDF). _www.epa.gov_. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved 29 March 2017.

## External links

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to
_**Cigarette**_.  
\---|---

  * US Center for Disease Control - Smoking and Health Database
  * GLOBALink
  * National Clearinghouse on Tobacco and Health - Canada
  * Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco
  * Bibliography on History of Cigarette Smoking

  * v

  * t
  * e

Cigarettes

* * *

Types|

  * Fashion
  * Fire safe
  * Kretek
  * Lights
  * Menthol
  * Beedi

|

![Zwei

zigaretten.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/32/Zwei_zigaretten.jpg/120px-

Zwei_zigaretten.jpg)

Components|

  * Tobacco
  * Rolling paper
  * Filter
  * Additives

Peripherals|

  * Ashtray
  * Case
  * Holder
  * Lighter
  * Pack
  * Receptacles
  * Vending machine

Culture|

  * Cigarette card
  * Cigarette smoking among college students
  * Loosie
  * Smoking fetishism
  * Tobacco smoking

Health issues|

  * Chain smoking
  * Cigarette smoking for weight loss
  * Nicotine poisoning
  * Passive smoking
  * Third-hand smoke
  * Schizophrenia and smoking
  * Sidestream smoke
  * Smoking cessation
  * Tobacco harm reduction

Related products|

  * Electronic cigarette
    * E-liquid
  * Candy cigarette
  * Herbal cigarette
  * Heat-not-burn tobacco product
  * Nicotine patch
  * Nicotine gum
  * Nicotine inhaler
  * Nicotine lozenge

Tobacco industry|

  * Cultivation of tobacco
  * Egyptian cigarette industry
  * History of commercial tobacco in the United States
  * Tobacco advertising

Government  
and the law|

  * Cigarette smuggling
  * Illicit cigarette trade
  * Plain cigarette packaging
  * Smoking age
  * Smoking bans in private vehicles
  * Tobacco control movement
  * Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement
  * Tobacco packaging warning messages
  * Tobacco politics
  * WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
  * Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products

Lists|

  * Cigarette brands
  * Cigarette smoke carcinogens
  * Countries by cigarette consumption per capita
  * Rolling papers
  * Smoking bans

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) **Category**

  * ![Commons page](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-Commons-logo.svg.png) **Commons**

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

  * BNF: cb12066152n (data)
  * GND: 4190811-9
  * LCCN: sh85025966
  * NARA: 10637184

\---|---

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cigarette&oldid=901282563"

Categories:

  * Cigarettes
  * American inventions

Hidden categories:

  * Pages with reference errors
  * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
  * CS1 French-language sources (fr)
  * CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty
  * CS1: long volume value
  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from November 2016
  * Articles with permanently dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from June 2016
  * All articles with self-published sources
  * Articles with self-published sources from March 2017
  * Articles with dead external links from July 2015
  * Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2010
  * Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2014
  * CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter
  * Pages with broken reference names
  * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013
  * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2011
  * Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012
  * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014
  * Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018
  * Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012
  * Portal templates with all redlinked portals
  * Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * View source
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Acèh
  * Afrikaans
  * العربية
  * Armãneashti
  * Arpetan
  * Asturianu
  * Azərbaycanca
  * تۆرکجه
  * বাংলা
  * Bân-lâm-gú
  * Беларуская
  * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
  * भोजपुरी
  * Български
  * Boarisch
  * བོད་ཡིག
  * Bosanski
  * Català
  * Čeština
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * Ελληνικά
  * Español
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * فارسی
  * Français
  * Gaeilge
  * Gaelg
  * Galego
  * گیلکی
  * 한국어
  * Հայերեն
  * Արեւմտահայերէն
  * हिन्दी
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Íslenska
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * Jawa
  * ಕನ್ನಡ
  * Kiswahili
  * Kurdî
  * Latina
  * Latviešu
  * Lëtzebuergesch
  * Lietuvių
  * Limburgs
  * Lumbaart
  * Magyar
  * Македонски
  * മലയാളം
  * مصرى
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
  * Монгол
  * မြန်မာဘာသာ
  * Nederlands
  * नेपाली
  * 日本語
  * Norsk
  * Norsk nynorsk
  * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Română
  * Runa Simi
  * Русиньскый
  * Русский
  * Scots
  * Sicilianu
  * Simple English
  * Slovenčina
  * Ślůnski
  * Soomaaliga
  * کوردی
  * Српски / srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
  * Basa Sunda
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * తెలుగు
  * ไทย
  * Türkçe
  * Українська
  * اردو
  * Vèneto
  * Tiếng Việt
  * West-Vlams
  * Winaray
  * ייִדיש
  * 粵語
  * Žemaitėška
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 10 June 2019, at 21:13 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

