

×

  * What is Alcoholism?
    * What is Alcoholism?
    * Warning Signs
    * Alcohol Withdrawal
    * Binge Drinking
    * Causes and Risk Factors
    * Drinking and Drugs
    * Adderall
    * Codeine
    * Hallucinogens
    * Heroin
    * Oxycodone
    * Meth
    * Effects of Abuse
    * How Long Does Alcohol Stay in Your System?
    * Alcohol Poisoning
    * Alcohol Crimes
    * Drinking and Driving (DUI)
    * Domestic Abuse
    * Minor in Possession
    * Open Container Violation
    * Public Intoxication
  * Treatment
    * Treatment
    * Alcohol Detox
    * Inpatient Rehab
    * Outpatient Rehab
    * Alcohol Counseling
    * Government Treatment
    * Life After Rehab and Aftercare
    * Alcohol Treatment Medications
    * Overview
    * Acamprosate
    * Benzodiazepines
    * Disulfiram
    * Naltrexone
    * Faith-Based Treatment
    * Alcohol and Fitness
  * Support Options
    * Support Options
    * Family & Friends Help
    * Alcohol Intervention
    * Alcoholics Anonymous
    * Al-Anon
    * SMART Recovery
  * Resources
    * Resources
    * Who Alcoholism Affects
    * Overview
    * Active Duty Military Personnel
    * College Students
    * Emergency and First Responders
    * Homeless Individuals
    * Individuals with Disabilities
    * Latino Americans
    * Legal Professionals
    * LGBTQ Individuals
    * Medical Professionals
    * Native Americans, Alaskan Natives, and Pacific Islanders
    * Pregnant Women
    * Professionals
    * Seniors
    * Service Industry
    * Underage Drinkers
    * Veterans
    * Women
    * Dual Diagnosis
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Borderline Personality Disorder
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    * Gambling Addiction
    * Grief
    * Insomnia
    * Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
    * Porn Addiction
    * Postpartum Depression
    * PTSD
    * Schizophrenia
    * Self-Esteem
    * Sex Addiction
    * Social Anxiety Disorder
    * Suicide
    * Alcohol-Related Medical Conditions
    * Overview
    * Alcohol Allergy
    * Brain Damage
    * Chronic Liver Disease
    * Hepatitis
    * HIV
    * Injury
    * STDs
  * Blog
  * About Us
    * About Us
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Advertising Policies
    * Add your treatment center
  * Search

(877) 624-1853

Speak with Northbound Treatment services **24/7**

Northbound Treatment Services – our premiere sponsor

Search

  * What is Alcoholism?
    * What is Alcoholism?
    * Warning Signs
    * Alcohol Withdrawal
    * Binge Drinking
    * Causes and Risk Factors
    * Drinking and Drugs
    * Adderall
    * Codeine
    * Hallucinogens
    * Heroin
    * Oxycodone
    * Meth
    * Effects of Abuse
    * How Long Does Alcohol Stay in Your System?
    * Alcohol Poisoning
    * Alcohol Crimes
    * Drinking and Driving (DUI)
    * Domestic Abuse
    * Minor in Possession
    * Open Container Violation
    * Public Intoxication
  * Treatment
    * Treatment
    * Alcohol Detox
    * Inpatient Rehab
    * Outpatient Rehab
    * Alcohol Counseling
    * Government Treatment
    * Life After Rehab and Aftercare
    * Alcohol Treatment Medications
    * Overview
    * Acamprosate
    * Benzodiazepines
    * Disulfiram
    * Naltrexone
    * Faith-Based Treatment
    * Alcohol and Fitness
  * Support Options
    * Support Options
    * Family & Friends Help
    * Alcohol Intervention
    * Alcoholics Anonymous
    * Al-Anon
    * SMART Recovery
  * Resources
    * Resources
    * Who Alcoholism Affects
    * Overview
    * Active Duty Military Personnel
    * College Students
    * Emergency and First Responders
    * Homeless Individuals
    * Individuals with Disabilities
    * Latino Americans
    * Legal Professionals
    * LGBTQ Individuals
    * Medical Professionals
    * Native Americans, Alaskan Natives, and Pacific Islanders
    * Pregnant Women
    * Professionals
    * Seniors
    * Service Industry
    * Underage Drinkers
    * Veterans
    * Women
    * Dual Diagnosis
    * ADHD
    * Anxiety
    * Bipolar Disorder
    * Borderline Personality Disorder
    * Depression
    * Eating Disorders
    * Gambling Addiction
    * Grief
    * Insomnia
    * Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
    * Porn Addiction
    * Postpartum Depression
    * PTSD
    * Schizophrenia
    * Self-Esteem
    * Sex Addiction
    * Social Anxiety Disorder
    * Suicide
    * Alcohol-Related Medical Conditions
    * Overview
    * Alcohol Allergy
    * Brain Damage
    * Chronic Liver Disease
    * Hepatitis
    * HIV
    * Injury
    * STDs
  * Blog
  * About Us
    * About Us
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Advertising Policies
    * Add your treatment center
  * Menu

# Drinking and Driving (DUI)

![](/app/uploads/2018/08/Drinking-and-Driving-1024x683-1024x683.jpg)

#### Make a decision that will change your life.

Find a rehab center

![](/app/uploads/2018/02/CTA_Rehab_Image1.png)

#### Popular Pages

  * Warning Signs of Alcoholism
  * Alcohol Withdrawal
  * Binge Drinking
  * Alcohol-Related Crimes
  * What is Alcoholism?
  * Drinking and Driving (DUI)
  * What Is Alcohol Poisoning?
  * College Alcoholism
  * Treating Alcoholism

#### He took control. You can too.

See Jerry's Story

![](/app/uploads/2017/12/jerry_small_bg-425x289.jpg)

## What Is Drinking and Driving (DUI)?

![Drinking and Driving](/app/uploads/2015/09/Drinking-and-

Driving-150x150.jpg)Getting behind the wheel of a vehicle – car, truck,
motorcycle or any other motorized vehicle – after consuming alcohol is a
serious crime. Drinking and driving is sometimes called driving under the
influence (DUI) or driving while intoxicated (DWI), and involves operating a
vehicle with a blood alcohol content (BAC) level of at least 0.08 percent.
However, even a small amount of alcohol can lead to harmful situations. Some
drivers may not even show warning signs of being under the influence, but that
doesn’t mean it’s any less dangerous. It’s important to remember that any form
of drinking and driving is illegal and can come with strict punishment.

The largest group at risk for drinking and driving are those who binge drink
or are struggling with an alcohol use disorder (AUD). This means they consume
a large amount of alcohol in a short period of time, putting them at risk for
harmful side effects. It takes roughly 30 minutes to two hours for alcohol to
be absorbed into your bloodstream. During this time, your breathing may slow
down and your cognitive skills may be delayed. Because of this, it is always
dangerous to drink and drive.

Alcoholism is a condition that can be treated with the help of a specialized
treatment center. If you or someone you love is struggling with a drinking
problem, it’s time to seek help and get your life back on track. Call a
treatment expert now to find top-rated rehab facilities that fit your needs.

### Dangers of Drinking and Driving

Any amount of alcohol in your bloodstream can impact your driving ability. The
effects of alcohol abuse vary greatly, putting you at risk for causing an
accident or highway injury. Safe driving requires the ability to concentrate,
make good judgements and quickly react to situations. However, alcohol affects
these skills, putting yourself and others in danger.

Here are several ways alcohol impairs your driving skills:

#### Slow reaction time

When alcohol is in your system, it affects how quickly you’re able to respond
to different situations. Drinking slows your response time, which can increase
the likelihood of an accident. Therefore, if the car in front of you brakes
suddenly or a pedestrian crosses the street, it will take longer for your
brain to process the situation and prevent an accident.

#### Lack of coordination

Heavy drinking affects your motor skills such as eye, hand and foot
coordination. Without crucial coordination skills, you may be unable to avoid
an impending harmful situation. Some telltale signs of reduced coordination
include trouble walking, swaying and inability to stand straight. Too much
alcohol can even make it difficult to get in your car and find its ignition.

#### Reduce concentration

Alcohol, no matter how much or how little, can influence your concentration.
With driving, there are many things that require your undivided concentration
such as staying in your lane, your speed, other cars on the road and traffic
signals. Your attention span is dramatically reduced with drinking, which
significantly increases the chance of an accident.

#### Decrease vision

Excessive alcohol consumption can negatively impact your vision. After
drinking, you may notice that your vision is blurred or that you’re unable to
control your eye movement. Impaired vision can affect how you judge the
distance between your car and other vehicles on the road. Additionally, fewer
objects may be visible within your peripheral vision, or what you can see to
either side of you when looking straight ahead.

#### Inhibit judgment

Your brain controls how you judge certain circumstances. When operating a
motorized vehicle, your judgement skills play an important role in how you
make decisions. For instance, you need to be able to foresee potential
problems and make clear decisions if another vehicle cuts you off. Your
judgement helps you stay alert and aware of surrounding conditions while
driving.

![Drinking and Driving Motor Vehicle Crashes](/app/uploads/2016/11/Drinking-

and-driving-1-150x150.jpg)

In the United States, roughly 28 people die every day in motor vehicle crashes
that involve an alcohol-impaired driver.

![Drinking and Driving Deaths](/app/uploads/2016/11/Drinking-and-

Driving-3-150x150.jpg)

In 2014, nearly 10,000 Americans were killed in alcohol-impaired driving
crashes. Alcohol-related accidents accounted for nearly one-third of all
traffic-related deaths.

![Drinking and Driving Arrests](/app/uploads/2016/11/Drinking-and-

Driving-2-150x150.jpg)

More than 1.1 million drivers were arrested for driving under the influence of
alcohol or narcotics in 2014.

### How Blood Alcohol Content (BAC) Levels Affect Driving

A blood alcohol content (BAC) level of 0.08 percent is considered legally
impaired. However, alcohol can start to affect many of your senses after only
one drink. No matter the circumstances, you should never drink and drive. It’s
not worth the risk of putting yourself and others in danger.

Here’s an example of how your BAC level affects your driving:

#### BAC of 0.02

Lack of judgment, increased relaxation, slightly increased body temperature,
mood swings, decreased visual functionality, inability to multi-task

#### BAC of 0.05

Increased lack of judgment, exaggerated behavior, lack of coordination,
reduced ability to detect moving objects, lack of alertness, lack of
inhibitions, decreased small-muscle control, reduced response rate

#### BAC of 0.08

Reduced muscle coordination, lack of judgment, lack of reasoning, lack of
self-control, loss of short-term memory, reduced ability to concentrate, lack
of speed control, reduced ability to process information

#### BAC of 0.10

Poor coordination, slowed reaction times, reduced ability to control the
vehicle, reduced ability to keep vehicle within a lane and brake at
appropriate times, slurred speech

#### BAC of 0.15

Extreme loss of balance, nearly zero muscle control, vomiting, impaired visual
and auditory information processing, significantly reduced attention to
driving tasks

Additionally, fatal crashes involving a 0.08 percent BAC level or higher are
charged as alcohol-impaired driving fatalities. Although the the alcohol-
impaired driving fatality rate decreased 27 percent between 2005 and 2014,
motor vehicle crashes involving alcohol cost the United States roughly $44
billion each year.

The economic costs of these crashes include:

  * Lost productivity
  * Workplace losses
  * Legal expenses
  * Medical costs
  * Emergency medical services
  * Insurance administration
  * Congestion
  * Property damage

### Who Is Most at Risk?

Alcohol consumption can put anyone at risk of causing an accident or other
serious injury. However, some populations are more likely to get behind the
wheel of a car after drinking.

Drivers who are between the ages of 16 and 20 years old are 10 times more
likely to be involved in a fatal crash, than drivers over the age of 21. While
the number of underage drinking and driving cases has significantly decreased,
many communities are pushing out new initiatives to keep adolescents safe. In
2011 alone, close to one million high school teens admitted to drinking and
driving.

The second highest alcohol-related crash risk includes individuals between the
ages of 21 to 24. In 2012, 21 to 24 year olds had the highest percentage of
drivers in fatal crashes with a BAC level of 0.08 percent or higher – 32
percent. Many of these cases involved binge drinking, a form of consuming too
much alcohol in a short period of time. This often affects college students
and young professionals who attend parties and other social events that have
easy access to alcohol.

### Get help for alcoholism

Take your life back by getting started in a treatment program today.

Learn more about treatment

![Alt text](/app/uploads/2017/11/incontent_bg.jpg)

### Drinking and Driving Laws

Federal regulation constitutes a DWI as driving with a BAC level of 0.08
percent or higher. A motor vehicle may include car, truck, bicycle, golf cart,
snowmobile and jet skis. Each state has its own laws surrounding DWI
convictions such as the fines involved, jail time and possible revoked or
suspended license. Depending on the legal charges, some states may also
require community service time or alcoholism treatment.

Many states have enacted various laws in an effort to reduce the dangers of
drinking and driving. For instance, zero tolerance laws are aimed at
adolescents who get behind the wheel of a car after consuming alcohol.
Drinking under the age of 21 is illegal in the United States and comes with
strict punishment. If you are charged with underage drinking and operating a
motor vehicle, you could face severe legal penalties.

A DWI or DUI conviction can impact your life in a number of ways. Consequences
of drinking and driving can hurt your family and relationships, cost you
employment opportunities, cause financial difficulties, high insurance rates
and possible time in jail.

### Don’t Let Alcoholism Destroy Your Life

Learn about the risk factors of alcoholism and the different forms of
treatment available.

For more information about alcohol treatment, speak with a recovery specialist
today.

  * Author -- Last Edited: May 15, 2019

![Photo of Carol Galbicsek](/app/uploads/2017/11/Carol-Galbicsek.jpg)

##### Carol Galbicsek

Carol is the lead writer for Alcohol Rehab Guide. She is passionate about
helping people who are struggling with alcohol abuse and addiction. Her past
experience in the medical field has led to a deep knowledge of the struggles
facing those with a substance use disorder (SUD), and a desire to do something
to help.

  * Sources

National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence, Inc. (2015). Driving While
Impaired – Alcohol and Drugs. November 2016. https://www.ncadd.org/about-
addiction/driving-while-impaired-alcohol-and-drugs

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Impaired Driving. Get the Facts.
November 2016.
http://www.cdc.gov/motorvehiclesafety/impaired_driving/impaired-
drv_factsheet.html

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (2015). Alcohol-Impaired
Driving. November 2016.
https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/812231

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012). Teen Drinking and Driving.
November 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/teendrinkinganddriving/index.html

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. (2012). Traffic Safety Facts,
2012 Data: Alcohol-Impaired Driving. November 2016.
https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwj456Xv9KjQAhWI7CYKHXuiCz8QFggkMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fcrashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov%2FApi%2FPublic%2FPublication%2F811870&usg=AFQjCNHmYblSqn6X-TK8Yw3xyM-
cHcqjZA&sig2=Nel96xcKFeHfxN0lK2nVRQ&bvm=bv.138493631,d.eWE

Previous PageHow Long Does Alcohol Stay in Your System? Next Page What Is
Alcohol Poisoning?

## Get help for alcoholism today.

If you or a loved one is ready to overcome an alcohol addiction, reach out to
Northbound Treatment Services. We will find top-rated treatment programs that
help you get and stay sober.

(877) 624-1853

  *     *       * 

Sign up for our newsletter.

Get the latest on addiction and recovery.

Sign Up

Alcohol Rehab Guide supports:

![SAMHSA Logo](/app/uploads/2017/12/samhsa_logo.png)

Copyright 2019 Recovery Worldwide. The information provided by
AlcoholRehabGuide.org is not a substitute for professional medical advice.

  * How We Choose Partners
  * Brought to you by Northbound Treatment Services
  * Privacy Policy

  * What is Alcoholism?

    * Warning Signs
    * Alcohol Withdrawal
    * Binge Drinking
    * Causes and Risk Factors
  * Treatment
    * Alcohol Detox
    * Inpatient Rehab
    * Outpatient Rehab
    * Alcohol Counseling
  * Support Options
    * Family and Friends Help
    * Alcohol Intervention
    * Alcoholics Anonymous
    * SMART Recovery
  * Resources
    * College Alcoholism
    * Alcohol and Depression
    * Alcoholism in Seniors
    * Alcohol Allergy
  * Blog
    * Lifestyle
    * Advice
    * Recovery
    * Prevention
  * About Us
    * Terms of Use
    * Privacy Policy
    * Advertising Policies
    * Add your treatment center

Speak with a treatment specialist **24/7**

(877) 624-1853

\- or -

Get a call now

×

Get help and take your life back now.

![](/app/uploads/2018/10/18_ARG_FlyoutPicture_V2.jpg)

Find a Treatment Center

## Get the help you need now.

We’re here 24/7 to help guide you or your loved on through rehab and recovery.
Make or receive a judgement-free call today with one of our compassionate
rehab specialists.

### Let Us Call You

(855) 860-9633

Get a Call

### or Give Us a Call

1-844-449-9683

×

## Get the help you need now.

We’re here 24/7 to help guide you or your loved on through rehab and recovery.
Submit your number to receive a judgement-free call today with one of our
compassionate rehab specialists.

(855) 860-9633

Get a Call

×

## Where do calls go?

Callers will be routed to:

  * Delphi Behavioral Health Group

×

## What does it mean that this site is brought to you by Northbound Treatment

Services?

Alcohol Rehab Guide is committed to providing trustworthy, accurate, and
authoritative information about the rehab facilities we feature on our site.
Therefore, we have partnered with the addiction treatment provider Northbound
Treatment Services, which was selected as a trusted provider with Addiction
Center after a careful vetting process. Our vetting process included due
diligence research such as visiting facilities, touring their programs,
meeting staff, and talking with key individuals in the industry.

Northbound has provided ethical and comprehensive treatment since 1988. With
top rated and nationally recognized programs in Orange County, St. Louis and
Seattle, Northbound has developed strategic partnerships with like-minded
people around the country to provide the resources to meet each individual
need. Northbound exemplifies their dedication through their company culture
and stakeholder satisfaction.

Learn more about why Northbound Treatment Services is a trusted provider with
Alcohol Rehab Guide.

×

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

