

Call us today

(973) 862 4820

  * Research Articles
  * Blog
  * Treatment Network

  * Treatment Network 

![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/adcare-icon-white.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/adcare-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/desert-hope-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/laguna-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/oxford-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/recovery-first-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/resolutions-icon-white.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/resolutions-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/river-oaks-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/green-house-icon.svg)

![](https://cdn.sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Sunrise-

House_color-horiz-400x141.png) Menu __close

  * Our Program __

    * Levels of Care

    * Therapy Types

    * Aftercare & Alumni

  * Explore Facility __

    * Features & Amenities
  * Admissions __

    * What to Expect
  * Payment Options

  * About Us __

    * Events and Media
  * Blog

  * Research Articles

  * Resources __

    * Addiction Treatment __

    * Alcohol

    * Heroin
    * Cocaine
    * Club Drugs
    * Prescriptions
    * Co-Occurring Disorders
    * Depression
    * Anxiety
    * Bipolar
    * PTSD
    * Detox
    * Residential
    * Outpatient
    * PHP
    * Therapies
    * Alumni Aftercare
    * Resource & Information

    * FAQ __

    * Intervention

    * Admissions
    * Detox
    * Mental Health
    * Treatment
    * Therapy
    * Outpatient
    * Aftercare

    * Assessment & Diagnosis __

    * Diagnose Addiction

    * Diagnose a Mental Health
    * Intake Process

    * The Cause and Effect of Substance Abuse __

    * Nature vs. Nurture

    * Signs of Addiction
    * Signs of Overdose

    * Addiction within Demographics __

    * Professions

    * Races
    * Socioeconomic
    * Comorbid Conditions
    * Parents
    * Trauma Victims
    * Pregnant Women

    * Northeast Treatment Guide __

    * Maryland

    * New Jersey
    * New York
    * Pennsylvania
    * Washington, DC

Get Help Now

Treatment Network

![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/adcare-icon-white.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/adcare-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/desert-hope-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/laguna-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/oxford-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/recovery-first-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/resolutions-icon-white.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/resolutions-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/river-oaks-icon.svg)
![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/assets/images/treatment-network/green-house-icon.svg)

Resource Center How to Quit Abusing Marijuana Smoking Cigarettes Compared to
Marijuana

# Smoking Cigarettes Compared to Marijuana

![contributor avatar](https://cdn.sunrisehouse.com/wp-

content/uploads/2019/03/avatar-placeholder.svg) Written by: Editorial Staff

Reviewed by: Amanda Lautieri

Last updated on June 3, 2019

2019-06-03T19:40:33+00:00

Many proponents of marijuana claim that smoking it is less harmful than
smoking cigarettes; however, this is a false claim for several reasons. First
of all, marijuana and tobacco are very different substances that have
profoundly different effects on the body and mind. Secondly, the process of
smoking a drug can still have similar effects on certain parts of the body,
such as the lungs and circulatory system, regardless of the drug type.

According to a study from the _Journal of Adolescent Health_ , modern
teenagers are very well informed about the dangers of smoking tobacco
cigarettes. However, they have received a fair bit of misinformation about the
effects of marijuana, and therefore, most often perceive it to be safer than
it is, especially when compared to cigarettes. To clear up some of the
confusion about smoking, marijuana, tobacco, and health effects, it can help
to provide a comparison of various elements of the drugs, how they are used,
and how they affect physical and mental health.

![](https://cdn.sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/smoking-

drus-400x267.jpg)

## Smoking in General

Before comparing and contrasting the drugs themselves, it is important to
understand the drug delivery method that is smoking and the damage this method
causes.

According to _Psychology Today_ , smoking is a very efficient way to deliver
drugs to the brain. In the case of cigarettes, smoking can deliver the
nicotine hit to the brain nearly instantly, resulting in a quick neural
response. The same is true for any drug used through smoking – delivery to the
brain is quick, resulting in a rapid onset of effects.

However, according to the American Lung Association, no matter the source of
smoke, it is harmful to the lungs. Whether from wood, tobacco, or marijuana,
smoke contains multiple toxins and carcinogens, or cancer-causing substances,
that can result in long-term breathing issues and lead to the development of
lung cancer.

![](https://cdn.sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Smoking-

Cigarettes-400x267.jpg)

* * *

### Vs.

* * *

![](https://cdn.sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/pot-400x267.jpg)

## Cigarettes Overview

Cigarettes are part of a billion dollar industry focused around smoking
tobacco, a plant that, as described by the Palo Alto Medical Foundation, is a
popular and legal drug containing the psychoactive substance nicotine.

While tobacco use, like alcohol use, is restricted in many places based on
age, it is not restricted like many other psychoactive substances. Cigarettes
and other forms of tobacco use have been a part of social culture for
centuries, ever since the drug was first found by Europeans in the Americas.
As a result, tobacco is the most heavily used addictive drug in the United
States and around the world.

## Marijuana Overview

Marijuana is the most popular, most used illicit drug. While several states
have legalized its medical use, and still others have legalized it
recreationally, it is still considered to be an illegal substance at the
federal level.

Nevertheless, there is a perception that marijuana is as safe as alcohol and
cigarettes – or even safer – and that it should be legal for use in a similar
manner to those substances. People consider it to be useful medicinally for
pain relief as well as for the treatment of mental illnesses.

Research into the medicinal benefits of marijuana is ongoing, and there may be
some validity to these claims. However, it is important to also be clear about
the effects and risks of marijuana use, especially through smoking it.

## Drug Type and Effects

**Cigarettes**

The psychoactive component of tobacco is nicotine, a stimulant substance that
increases dopamine levels in the brain, resulting in feelings of pleasure and
reward. As a stimulant, nicotine also causes increases in neural activity and
a perceived increase in energy.

As described in the _Psychology Today_ article, the frequency of cigarette use
for many people leads to quick development of tolerance and addiction. A
person who smokes about 30 cigarettes per day can get up to 300 hits of
nicotine, resulting in a major effect on dopamine in the brain.

When a person stops using tobacco, withdrawal symptoms quickly manifest and
can last a month or more. These include:

  * Irritability.
  * Anxiety.
  * Restlessness.
  * Depressed mood.
  * Sleep disturbances.
  * Increased appetite.
  * Difficulty focusing.

Despite being a stimulant, nicotine can also have a sedative effect on
smokers, depending on the dose and the individual person’s central nervous
system arousal.

* * *

### Vs.

* * *

**Marijuana**

The psychoactive substance in marijuana is a chemical called
tetrahydrocannabinol, commonly referred to as THC. This substance is similar
to naturally occurring chemicals in the human body called _cannabinoids_ ,
which are involved with processes related to perception of time and
coordination, pleasure, memory, and cognition. The effects of the drug include
loss of sense of time, changes in visual perception, impaired memory and
thought processes, and euphoria.

Marijuana can also serve as a mild hallucinogen, creating delusions through
the altered perceptions of time and space.

## Smoking

**Cigarettes**

As with any type of inhaled smoke, cigarettes don’t just deliver the
psychoactive substance to the brain; they also deliver toxins and carcinogens
to the lungs through the smoke. Because of these substances, the American
Cancer Society reports that women who smoke are about 25.7 times more likely
than women who never smoked to develop lung cancer. Men who smoke are about 25
times more likely to develop it than men who never smoked.

**Marijuana**

According to the American Lung Association, smoking marijuana can be just as
harmful to the lungs as smoking cigarettes, if not more so. First of all,
marijuana smokers tend to inhale more deeply and hold their breath longer,
which results in longer exposure to tar, a toxin from the smoke. In addition,
some research indicates that marijuana smoke may potentially have more toxins
and carcinogens in it than cigarette smoke, resulting in the potential for
more damage to the lungs based on the smoke alone.

## Physical and Mental Health Risks

![](https://cdn.sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/lung-

problems-400x267.jpg)

**Cigarettes**

According to the Royal College of Psychiatrists, developing lung cancer is not
the only health risk of smoking. There are multiple physical and mental risks
of this addiction.

Physical effects include:

  * Inability to achieve sexual arousal in men.
  * Inability to get pregnant in women, and lower infant birth weight and decreased infant health.
  * Other lung disease, such as asthma and emphysema.
  * Decreased immunity and lower general health levels.

Mental effects include:

  * Higher potential of developing mental illness.
  * Anxiety and depression.
  * Higher potential for developing other addictions.
  * Nervousness, agitation, and cravings.

* * *

## Vs.

* * *

**Marijuana**

The effects of marijuana smoke alone provide a great deal of physical risk.
Not only can they lead to lung cancer, but they also have been shown to cause
problems with:

  * Chronic and acute bronchitis, phlegm production, and wheezing
  * Immune system suppression
  * Increased risk of opportunistic infections among those who are HIV positive

In addition, smoking marijuana can have severe mental effects. As described by
_Psychology Today_ , these can include:

  * Impaired memory and cognitive function.
  * Delayed brain development in younger people.
  * Potential development of psychosis.
  * Depression and anxiety.

Looking at the comparisons between smoking tobacco and smoking marijuana,
there is certainly an argument to be made that neither is safer than the
other. For this reason, if a person is struggling with addiction to either
substance, finding a research-based, reputable addiction treatment program can
be a first step in returning to better physical and mental health, and
experiencing a future of recovery from drug abuse.

  * Tweet 
  * Tweet 
  * Pin It 
  * Add 
  * Email 

  * Are There Health Risks to Long-Term Marijuana Abuse?

  * Hashish vs. Marijuana
  * Marijuana: Legalization vs. Laws against It
  * Smoking Cigarettes Compared to Marijuana
  * The Forms of Marijuana and the Ways They Are Taken

##### Don’t just dream about a new life. Live it.

Recovery starts with a phone call. A caring Admissions Navigator is available
for you 24/7. Call Now.

**(973) 862 4820** _![](https://sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/themes/sunrise-

bigdrop/slice/dist/images/icon-phone.svg) _

![](https://cdn.sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/logo-footer.svg)

#### Address of Facility

Sunrise House Treatment Center  
37 Sunset Inn Road  
Lafayette, NJ 07848

Get Directions

  * Brand Promise Details
  * Notice of Privacy Practices

  * Privacy Policy

  * Terms of Use

  * Careers

  * Site Map

  * ![](https://cdn.sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/icon-twitter.svg)

  * ![](https://cdn.sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/icon-facebook.svg)
  * ![](https://cdn.sunrisehouse.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/icon-linkedin.svg)

(C) 2019 American Addiction Centers. All rights reserved.  
Various trademarks held by their respective owners.

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

