

Skip to main content

En español

  * Research
  * Medical & Health Professionals
  * Patients & Families
  * Parents & Educators
  * Children & Teens

![NIDA](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/nih-nida-logo.gif)

Search

Connect with NIDA: __Facebook __LinkedIn __Twitter __YouTube __Flickr __RSS

## Menu

Home

Drugs of Abuse

  * Cocaine
  * Heroin
  * Opioids
  * Marijuana
  * MDMA (Ecstasy)
  * Methamphetamine
  * Prescription Medicines

More Drugs of Abuse

### Quick Links

  * ![Opioid Crisis thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-crisis.png)Opioid Crisis
  * ![Commonly Abused Drugs Chart thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/commonly-abused-drugs.png)Commonly Abused Drugs Chart
  * ![Emerging Trends thumbnails](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/emerging-trends.png)Emerging Trends
  * ![Fentanyl thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fentanyl.png)Fentanyl

Related Topics

  * Addiction Science
  * Comorbidity
  * Drugged Driving
  * Opioid Overdose Reversal with Naloxone
  * Prevention
  * Treatment
  * Trends & Statistics

More Related Topics

### Quick Links

  * ![ABCD thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/abcd-study.png)ABCD Study
  * ![college thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/college.png)College
  * ![women thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/women.png)Women
  * ![Treatment guides thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/treatment-guides.png)Treatment Guides

Publications

  * DrugFacts
  * Research Reports
  * Mind Over Matter
  * Science of Addiction
  * Policy Briefs

More Publications

Search Publications

### Select Categories to Search

By Drugs of Abuse AlcoholAmphetaminesBath SaltsBrain and AddictionClub
DrugsCocaineDrug Overdoses in YouthEmerging
DrugsFentanylGHBHallucinogensHeroinIllegal DrugsIllicit OpioidsIllicit
StimulantsInhalantsK2/SpiceKratomLSD (Acid)MarijuanaMDMA
(Ecstasy)MethamphetamineNaloxoneNicotineOpioidsOther DrugsOver-the-Counter
MedicationsPain MedicationPCP (Phencyclidine)Prescription DrugsPrescription
StimulantsRitalinSalviaSedativesSteroids (Anabolic)Tobacco

By Drug Topics 12-stepABCDAddiction ScienceAftercareBrainCollege-Age and Young
AdultsComorbidityCriminal JusticeDrug TestingDrugged DrivingEvidence- Based
PracticesGeneticsHIV or AIDSLa prevencionMedical ConsequencesMental
HealthMilitary and VeteransOutpatientOverdosePainPrevention
ResearchRecoveryrelapse preventionTrainingTratamientoTreatmentTreatment
ResearchTrends and StatisticsWomen and Drugs

By Audience Health and Medical ProfessionalsParentsResearchersSpanish
SpeakersStudentsTeachers

By Series Teaching PacketsDrugFactsBrain PowerMind MattersPolicy
BriefsResearch ReportsAddiction Science and Clinical Practice

### Quick Links

  * ![Brain thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drugs-brain-behavior.png)Drugs, Brain & Behavior
  * ![Opioid Facts for Teens thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/opioid-fft.png)Opioid Facts for Teens
  * ![Treatment thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/seeking-treatment.png)Seeking Treatment

Research

  * NIDA Research Programs & Activities
  * Clinical Research
  * Research Training & Career Development
  * Resources for Grants & Contracts
  * NIH Policies & Guidance
  * Research Data, Measures, & Resources

More Research

### Quick Links

  * ![HEAL logo thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nih-heal.png)HEAL Initiative
  * ![Supply Program Thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/drug-supply-program.png)NIDA Drug Supply Program
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/ctn.png)Clinical Trials Stewardship
  * ![Training thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/training.png)Training & Career Development Fellowships and Grants
  * ![DATthumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Special/Continuing Interest (DAT)

Funding

  * NIDA Funding Opportunities
  * Trans-NIH Funding Opportunities
  * Contracts and Small Businesses

More Funding

### Search for Funding

### Quick Links

  * ![Peer Review thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/peer-review.png)Peer Review
  * ![Forms thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/forms.png)Grant Application Forms
  * ![FAQ thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/faq.png)Frequently Asked Questions
  * ![process thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/process.png)Grant & Contract Application Process
  * ![DAT thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/dat.png)NIDA Topics of Interest (DAT)

News

  * News Releases
  * Nora's Blog
  * NIDA Notes
  * Public Education Projects
  * NIDA in the News
  * Subject Area Experts

More News

### Quick Links

  * ![Meetings thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/meetings-events.png)Meetings & Events
  * ![NIDATV thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/nida-tv.png)NIDATV
  * ![Media guide thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/media-guide.png)NIDA Media Guide
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact the Press Office

About NIDA

  * Director's Page
  * Organization
  * Legislative Activities
  * Advisory Boards & Groups
  * Working at NIDA
  * Directions to NIDA

More About NIDA

### Quick Links

  * ![NIDA Strategic Plan thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/strategic-plan.png)NIDA Strategic Plan
  * ![Budget thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/fiscal.png)FY 2019 Budget Information
  * ![CTN thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/clinical-trials.png)Clinical Trials Network
  * ![contact thumbnail](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/megamenu/contact.png)Contact Us

__Search

__Share

* * *

  * Print

Home » Publications » DrugFacts » Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products

# Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products

Email Facebook Twitter

Revised June 2018

## What is tobacco?

![Rows of tobacco leaves hanging to

dry.](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/tobacco_leaves.jpg)Tobacco
leaves  
Photo by (C)iStock.com/USO

Tobacco is a plant grown for its leaves, which are dried and fermented before
being put in tobacco products. Tobacco contains nicotine, an ingredient that
can lead to addiction, which is why so many people who use tobacco find it
difficult to quit. There are also many other potentially harmful chemicals
found in tobacco or created by burning it.

## How do people use tobacco?

People can smoke, chew, or sniff tobacco. Smoked tobacco products include
cigarettes, cigars, bidis, and kreteks. Some people also smoke loose tobacco
in a pipe or hookah (water pipe). Chewed tobacco products include chewing
tobacco, snuff, dip, and snus; snuff can also be sniffed.

## How does tobacco affect the brain?

The nicotine in any tobacco product readily absorbs into the blood when a
person uses it. Upon entering the blood, nicotine immediately stimulates the
adrenal glands to release the hormone epinephrine (adrenaline). Epinephrine
stimulates the central nervous system and increases blood pressure, breathing,
and heart rate. As with drugs such as cocaine and heroin, nicotine activates
the brain's reward circuits and also increases levels of the chemical
messenger _dopamine_ , which reinforces rewarding behaviors. Studies suggest
that other chemicals in tobacco smoke, such as acetaldehyde, may enhance
nicotine's effects on the brain.

## What are other health effects of tobacco use?

Although nicotine is addictive, most of the severe health effects of tobacco
use comes from other chemicals. Tobacco smoking can lead to lung cancer,
chronic bronchitis, and emphysema. It increases the risk of heart disease,
which can lead to stroke or heart attack. Smoking has also been linked to
other cancers, leukemia, cataracts, and pneumonia. All of these risks apply to
use of any smoked product, including hookah tobacco. Smokeless tobacco
increases the risk of cancer, especially mouth cancers.

### Electronic Cigarettes

Electronic cigarettes, also known as e-cigarettes or e-vaporizers, are
battery-operated devices that deliver nicotine with flavorings and other
chemicals to the lungs in vapor instead of smoke. E-cigarette companies often
advertise them as safer than traditional cigarettes because they don't burn
tobacco. But researchers actually know little about the health risks of using
these devices. Read more about e-cigarettes in our _Electronic Cigarettes
(e-Cigarettes) DrugFacts._

Pregnant women who smoke cigarettes run an increased risk of miscarriage,
stillborn or premature infants, or infants with low birth weight. Smoking
while pregnant may also be associated with learning and behavioral problems in
exposed children.

People who stand or sit near others who smoke are exposed to secondhand smoke,
either coming from the burning end of the tobacco product or exhaled by the
person who is smoking. Secondhand smoke exposure can also lead to lung cancer
and heart disease. It can cause health problems in both adults and children,
such as coughing, phlegm, reduced lung function, pneumonia, and bronchitis.
Children exposed to secondhand smoke are at an increased risk of ear
infections, severe asthma, lung infections, and death from sudden infant death
syndrome.

## How does tobacco use lead to addiction?

For many who use tobacco, long-term brain changes brought on by continued
nicotine exposure result in addiction. When a person tries to quit, he or she
may have withdrawal symptoms, including:

  * irritability 
  * problems paying attention 
  * trouble sleeping 
  * increased appetite 
  * powerful cravings for tobacco 

## How can people get treatment for nicotine addiction?

Both behavioral treatments and medications can help people quit smoking, but
the combination of medication with counseling is more effective than either
alone.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has established a national
toll-free quitline, 1-800-QUIT-NOW, to serve as an access point for anyone
seeking information and help in quitting smoking.

### Government Regulation of Tobacco Products

On May 5, 2016, the FDA announced that nationwide tobacco regulations now
extend to all tobacco products, including:

  * e-cigarettes and their liquid solutions 
  * cigars 
  * hookah tobacco 
  * pipe tobacco 

This ruling includes restricting sale of these products to minors. For more
information, see the FDA 's webpage, The Facts on the FDA's New Tobacco Rule.

### Behavioral Treatments

Behavioral treatments use a variety of methods to help people quit smoking,
ranging from self-help materials to counseling. These treatments teach people
to recognize high-risk situations and develop strategies to deal with them.
For example, people who hang out with others who smoke are more likely to
smoke and less likely to quit.

### Nicotine Replacement Therapies

Nicotine replacement therapies (NRTs) were the first medications the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for use in smoking cessation therapy.

Current FDA-approved NRT products include chewing gum, transdermal patch,
nasal sprays, inhalers, and lozenges. NRTs deliver a controlled dose of
nicotine to relieve withdrawal symptoms while the person tries to quit.

### Other Medications

Bupropion (Zyban®) and varenicline (Chantix®) are two FDA-approved non-
nicotine medications that have helped people quit smoking. They target
nicotine receptors in the brain, easing withdrawal symptoms and blocking the
effects of nicotine if people start smoking again.

## Can a person overdose on nicotine?

Nicotine is poisonous and, though uncommon, overdose is possible. An overdose
occurs when the person uses too much of a drug and has a toxic reaction that
results in serious, harmful symptoms or death. Nicotine poisoning usually
occurs in young children who accidentally chew on nicotine gum or patches used
to quit smoking or swallow e-cigarette liquid. Symptoms include difficulty
breathing, vomiting, fainting, headache, weakness, and increased or decreased
heart rate. Anyone concerned that a child or adult might be experiencing a
nicotine overdose should seek immediate medical help.

### Points to Remember

  * Tobacco is a plant grown for its leaves, which are dried and fermented before being put in tobacco products. Tobacco contains nicotine, the ingredient that can lead to addiction. 
  * People can smoke, chew, or sniff tobacco. 
  * Nicotine acts in the brain by stimulating the adrenal glands to release the hormone epinephrine (adrenaline) and by increasing levels of the chemical messenger dopamine. 
  * Tobacco smoking can lead to lung cancer, chronic bronchitis, and emphysema. It increases the risk of heart disease, which can lead to stroke or heart attack. Smoking has also been linked to other cancers, leukemia, cataracts, and pneumonia. Smokeless tobacco increases the risk of cancer, especially mouth cancers. 
  * Secondhand smoke can lead to lung cancer and heart disease as well as other health effects in adults and children. 
  * For many who use tobacco, long-term brain changes brought on by continued nicotine exposure result in addiction. 
  * Both behavioral treatments and medication can help people quit smoking, but the combination of medication with counseling is more effective than either alone. 
  * Nicotine overdose is possible, though it usually occurs in young children who accidentally chew on nicotine gum or patches or swallow e-cigarette liquid. 
  * Anyone concerned that a child or adult might be experiencing a nicotine overdose should seek immediate medical help. 

## Learn More

For more information about tobacco products and nicotine, visit our
Tobacco/Nicotine webpage.

For more information about how to quit smoking, visit smokefree.gov.

This publication is available for your use and may be reproduced **in its
entirety** without permission from the NIDA. Citation of the source is
appreciated, using the following language: Source: National Institute on Drug
Abuse; National Institutes of Health; U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.

This page was last updated June 2018

![DrugFacts](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/drugfacts.jpg)

## More DrugFacts

### Health Effects of Specific Drugs

Anabolic Steroids

Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products

Cocaine

Electronic Cigarettes (E-cigarettes)

Fentanyl

Hallucinogens

Heroin

Inhalants

Kratom

Marijuana

Marijuana as Medicine

MDMA (Ecstasy/Molly)

Methamphetamine

Over-the-Counter Medicines

Prescription CNS Depressants

Prescription Opioids

Prescription Stimulants

Synthetic Cannabinoids (K2/Spice)

Synthetic Cathinones ("Bath Salts")

### Effects of Drug Use

Comorbidity: Substance Use Disorders and Other Mental Illnesses

Drug Use and Viral Infections (HIV, Hepatitis)

Drugged Driving

Understanding Drug Use and Addiction

### Survey Data

Drug-Related Hospital Emergency Room Visits

Monitoring the Future Survey: High School and Youth Trends

Nationwide Trends

Treatment Statistics

### Prevention and Treatment

Lessons from Prevention Research

Substance Abuse in the Military

Treatment Approaches for Drug Addiction

## Get this Publication

  * Español
  * PDF (668KB)

##### Cite this article

APA StyleMLA StyleAMA Style

NIDA. (2018, June 6). Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products. Retrieved from
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/cigarettes-other-tobacco-
products

NIDA. "Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products." _National Institute on Drug
Abuse_ , 6 Jun. 2018,
https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/cigarettes-other-tobacco-
products.

NIDA. Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products. National Institute on Drug Abuse
website. https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/cigarettes-other-
tobacco-products. June 6, 2018.

press ctrl+c to copy

## Additional Drug Facts

![Drug Facts for

Teens](http://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/n4t_webbadge_235px.jpg)  
![Easy-to-read Drug

Facts](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/easyread-

badge.jpg)

## Smoking Quitline

**For help from the National Cancer Institute: 1-877-44U-QUIT
(1-877-448-7848)**

The National Cancer Institute's trained counselors are available to provide
information and help with quitting in English or Spanish, Monday through
Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time.

Learn more about quitting smoking

## Other Articles of Interest

### NIDA Notes

  * Switching to Reduced-Nicotine Cigarettes May Aid in Quitting Smoking 

  * E-Cigarettes Promote Smoking Progression in Youth and Depress Quitting Among Adults

### Nora's Blog

  * Recent Research Sheds New Light on Why Nicotine is So Addictive

  * Million-Participant NIH Study Could Yield Important Insights into Addiction and Pain

### Science Highlight

  * Immediate switch to low levels of nicotine in cigarettes more effective than a gradual reduction

  * E-Cigs linked to heart attacks

![NIDA Notes: The Latest in Drug Abuse

Research](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/bg.png)

## Research Report

![Tobacco, Nicotine, and E-Cigarette Research

Report](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/tob_ecig_thumbnail.gif)

### Tobacco, Nicotine, and E-Cigarettes

Discusses the harmful effects of tobacco use, risks associated with pregnancy
and adolescents, as well as best practices for the prevention and treatment of
tobacco addiction.

Read more

## Lesson Plan and Activity Finder

![Lesson Plan and Activity

Finder](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/lesson_tool_badge.jpg)  
Share This Badge

## NIDA TV Spotlight: Tobacco Partnership with FDA

![NIDA TV Spotlight: Tobacco Partnership with

FDA](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/images/nida_tvVideo_FDA.jpg)

Watch video (0:53)

![I'm ready to Quit!

smokefree.gov](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/images/btn-

smokefree-170x149.png)

![You Can quit smoking. Talk with your doctor for help. CDC. Learn

more.](https://d14rmgtrwzf5a.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/images/btn-

twyd-150x125.jpg)

  * NIDA Home
  * Site Map
  * Accessibility
  * Privacy
  * FOIA
  * Working at NIDA
  * FAQs
  * Contact
  * Subscribe
  * Archives

![USA.gov](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-usagov.png)
![HHS](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-hhs.gif)
![NIH](/sites/all/themes/nida_vic_adaptive/images/footer-logo-nih-new.gif)

PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader. Flash content requires the free
Adobe Flash Player.

NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

