

# Dronabinol

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Not to be confused with Droperidol.

## Part of a series on

Cannabis  
![Cannabis](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a8/Cannabis_leaf.svg/120px-

Cannabis_leaf.svg.png)

  * Arts
  * Culture

  * 420

  * Magu (deity)
  * Names
  * Religion
    * Judaism
    * Latter-day Saints
    * Sikhism
  * Stoner film
  * Stoner rock
  * Terms

Chemistry

  * **Cannabinoid receptors**
  * Cannabinoid receptor type 1
  * Cannabinoid receptor type 2

  * **Cannabinoids**

  * 2-AG

  * 2-AGE, Noladin ether
  * AEA
  * CBC
  * CBL
  * CBD
  * CBDV
  * CBG
  * CBN
  * CBV
  * NADA
  * THC
  * THCV
  * Virodhamine
  * **Synthetic cannabinoids**

  * AM-2201

  * CP-55940
  * Dimethylheptylpyran
  * HU-210
  * HU-331
  * JWH-018
  * JWH-073
  * JWH-133
  * Levonantradol
  * SR144528
  * WIN 55,212-2

Consumption

  * Edibles
  * Smoking
  * Tea

Economics

  * Coffeeshop
  * Cultivation
  * Shop
  * Social Club
  * Grow house
  * Grow shop
  * Head shop
  * Marijuana vending machine

Effects

  * Dependence
  * Drug testing
  * Effects of legalized cannabis
  * Gateway drug theory
  * Long term effects
  * Medicine
  * Memory
  * Pregnancy
  * Psychosis
  * Time perception

Forms

  * Bhang
  * Blunt
  * Charas
  * Flower essential oil
  * Hash oil
  * Hashish
  * Hemp
  * Hemp oil
  * Joint
  * Kief
  * Roach
  * Synthetic cannabis
  * Thai stick
  * Tincture

Law

  * Cannabis rights

  * Legality of cannabis

  * Timeline of cannabis law

  * Legality of cannabis in US

  * Legal history of cannabis in US

  * US (Medical

  * Non-medical
  * Timeline)

  * Cannabis Act of Canada

  * Legal history of cannabis in Canada

  * Drug policy of California

  * Drug policy of the Netherlands

  * Drug policy of Portugal

Regional

  * Adult lifetime cannabis use by country
  * Annual cannabis use by country
  * Afghanistan
  * Alabama
  * American Samoa
  * Arkansas
  * Australia
  * California
  * Canada
  * Chile
  * Colorado
  * Egypt
  * Georgia (USA)
  * Guam
  * Idaho
  * India
  * Indiana
  * Iowa
  * Jamaica
  * Kansas
  * Kentucky
  * Louisiana
  * Maine
  * Massachusetts
  * Montana
  * Morocco
  * Nebraska
  * New Zealand
  * Nigeria
  * North Dakota
  * North Mariana Islands
  * Oregon
  * Palau
  * Papua New Guinea
  * Paraguay
  * Portugal
  * South Dakota
  * Svalbard
  * Switzerland
  * Tennessee
  * U.K.
  * U.S.
  * Uruguay
  * Utah
  * Vermont
  * Virginia
  * Virginia
  * Wisconsin
  * Wyoming
  * American Indian reservations

Variants

  * Autoflowering cannabis

  * **Cannabis genus**

  * Cannabis indica

  * Cannabis ruderalis
  * Cannabis sativa

  * **Cannabis strains**

  * Acapulco Gold

  * Blue Dream
  * Charlotte's web
  * Kush
  * Malawi Gold
  * Sour Diesel

Related

  * Drug culture
  * Illegal drug trade
  * Psychedelia

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/44/Cannabis_leaf_2.svg/15px-Cannabis_leaf_2.svg.png) Cannabis portal

  * ![Esculaap4.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/66/Esculaap4.svg/15px-Esculaap4.svg.png) Medicine portal
  * ![Veranotrigo.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4f/Veranotrigo.jpg/15px-Veranotrigo.jpg) Agriculture portal

  * v

  * t
  * e

The International Nonproprietary Name **Dronabinol** , sold as trade names
**Marinol** and **Syndros** , is an appetite stimulant, antiemetic, and sleep
apnea reliever.[1] It is approved by the FDA as safe and effective for
HIV/AIDS-induced anorexia and chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting
only.[2][3][4]

The pharmaceutical formulation, an oily resin in capsules, is available by
prescription in the US, Canada, Germany, Australia and New Zealand. Possible
exceptions for off label use may be in US states passing laws reserving the
right to differ from particular FDA regulations.[ _citation needed_ ]

Dronabinol is the principal psychoactive constituent enantiomer form, (−)-
_trans_ -Δ⁹-tetrahydrocannabinol, found in cannabis.[5] Dronabinol does not
include the many other tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) isomers of cannabinoid.[
_citation needed_ ]

## Contents

  * 1 Medical uses
  * 2 Adverse effects
  * 3 History
  * 4 Society and culture
    * 4.1 Brand names
    * 4.1.1 Comparisons with medical cannabis
  * 5 See also
  * 6 References
  * 7 External links

## Medical uses[edit]

Dronabinol demonstrates significant improvement in sleep apnea
scores.[6][7][8] Phase 2B clinical trials for FDA approval were completed in
2017.[9][10][11]

## Adverse effects[edit]

A mild overdose of dronabinol presents drowsiness, cotton-mouth, euphoria, and
tachycardia; whereas a severe overdose presents lethargy, slurred speech,
decreased motor coordination, and postural hypotension.[2][12]

## History[edit]

On May 13, 1986, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) issued a Final Rule
and Statement of Policy authorizing the "rescheduling of synthetic dronabinol
in sesame oil and encapsulated in soft gelatin capsules from Schedule I to
Schedule II" (DEA 51 FR 17476-78). This permitted medical use of Marinol,
albeit with the severe restrictions associated with Schedule II status.[13]
For instance, refills of Marinol prescriptions were not permitted. At its 10th
meeting, on April 29, 1991, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, in accordance
with article 2, paragraphs 5 and 6, of the Convention on Psychotropic
Substances, decided that Δ⁹-tetrahydrocannabinol (also referred to as Δ⁹-THC)
and its stereochemical variants should be transferred from Schedule I to
Schedule II of that Convention. This released Marinol from the restrictions
imposed by Article 7 of the Convention (See also United Nations Convention
Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances).[
_citation needed_ ]

An article published in the April–June 1998 issue of the Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs found that "Healthcare professionals have detected no
indication of scrip-chasing or doctor-shopping among the patients for whom
they have prescribed dronabinol". The authors state that Marinol has a low
potential for abuse.[14]

In 1999, Marinol was rescheduled from Schedule II to III of the Controlled
Substances Act, reflecting a finding that THC had a potential for abuse less
than that of cocaine and heroin. This rescheduling constituted part of the
argument for a 2002 petition for removal of cannabis from Schedule I of the
Controlled Substances Act, in which petitioner Jon Gettman noted, "Cannabis is
a natural source of dronabinol (THC), the ingredient of Marinol, a Schedule
III drug. There are no grounds to schedule cannabis in a more restrictive
schedule than Marinol".[15]

At its 33rd meeting, in 2003, the World Health Organization Expert Committee
on Drug Dependence recommended transferring THC to Schedule IV of the
Convention, citing its medical uses and low abuse potential.[16]

## Society and culture[edit]

### Brand names[edit]

Dronabinol is marketed as Marinol and Syndros,[17] a registered trademark of
Solvay Pharmaceuticals. Dronabinol is also marketed, sold, and distributed by
PAR Pharmaceutical Companies under the terms of a license and distribution
agreement with SVC pharma LP, an affiliate of Rhodes Technologies for Marinol
and Insys Pharmaceuticals for Syndros.[ _citation needed_ ] Dronabinol is
available as a prescription drug (under Marinol and Syndros [18]) in several
countries including the United States, Germany, South Africa and
Australia.[19] In the United States, Marinol is a Schedule III drug, available
by prescription, considered to be non-narcotic and to have a low risk of
physical or mental dependence. Efforts to get cannabis rescheduled as
analogous to Marinol have not succeeded thus far, though a 2002 petition has
been accepted by the DEA. As a result of the rescheduling of Marinol from
Schedule II to Schedule III, refills are now permitted for this substance.
Marinol's U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for medical use has
raised much controversy[20] as to why natural THC is considered a schedule I
drug.[21]

#### Comparisons with medical cannabis[edit]

Further information: Medical cannabis

Female cannabis plants contain at least 113 cannabinoids,[22] including
cannabidiol (CBD), thought to be the major anticonvulsant that helps people
with multiple sclerosis;[23] and cannabichromene (CBC), an anti-inflammatory
which may contribute to the pain-killing effect of cannabis.[24]

It takes over one hour for Marinol to reach full systemic effect,[25] compared
to seconds or minutes for smoked or vaporized cannabis.[26] Mark Kleiman,
director of the Drug Policy Analysis Program at UCLA's School of Public
Affairs said of Marinol, "It wasn't any fun and made the user feel bad, so it
could be approved without any fear that it would penetrate the recreational
market, and then used as a club with which to beat back the advocates of whole
cannabis as a medicine."[27]

Some people accustomed to inhaling just enough cannabis smoke to manage
symptoms have complained of too-intense intoxication from Marinol's
predetermined dosages.[ _citation needed_ ] Many people using Marinol have
said that Marinol produces a more acute psychedelic effect than cannabis, and
it has been speculated that this disparity can be explained by the moderating
effect of the many non-THC cannabinoids present in cannabis.[ _citation
needed_ ] For that reason, alternative THC-containing medications based on
botanical extracts of the cannabis plant such as nabiximols are being
developed.

Clinical trials comparing the use of cannabis extracts with Marinol in the
treatment of cancer cachexia have demonstrated equal efficacy and well-being
among subjects in the two treatment arms.[28] United States federal law
currently registers dronabinol as a Schedule III controlled substance, but all
other cannabinoids remain Schedule I, except synthetics like nabilone.[29]

## See also[edit]

  * Epidiolex
  * Sativex

## References[edit]

  1. **^** "Can Dronabinol Help Treat Sleep Apnea? | HealthCentral". _www.healthcentral.com_. Retrieved 2018-11-04.
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Marinol (Dronabinol)" (PDF). US Food and Drug Administration. September 2004. Retrieved 14 January 2018.
  3. **^** "Cannabis and Cannabinoids". National Cancer Institute. 2011-10-24. Retrieved 12 January 2014.
  4. **^** Badowski ME (September 2017). "A review of oral cannabinoids and medical marijuana for the treatment of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: a focus on pharmacokinetic variability and pharmacodynamics". _Cancer Chemotherapy and Pharmacology_. **80** (3): 441–449. doi:10.1007/s00280-017-3387-5. PMC 5573753. PMID 28780725.
  5. **^** "List of psychotropic substances under international control". _International Narcotics Control Board_. International Narcotics Control Board. Archived from the original (PDF) on `|archive-url=` requires `|archive-date=` (help). Retrieved 25 April 2018. "This international non-proprietary name refers to only one of the stereochemical variants of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, namely (−)-trans-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol"
  6. **^** "(PDF) Proof of Concept Trial of Dronabinol in Obstructive Sleep Apnea". _ResearchGate_. Retrieved 2018-11-04.
  7. **^** "Can Dronabinol Help Treat Sleep Apnea? | HealthCentral". _www.healthcentral.com_. Retrieved 2018-11-04.
  8. **^** Carley DW, Prasad B, Reid KJ, Malkani R, Attarian H, Abbott SM, Vern B, Xie H, Yuan C, Zee PC (January 2018). "Pharmacotherapy of Apnea by Cannabimimetic Enhancement, the PACE Clinical Trial: Effects of Dronabinol in Obstructive Sleep Apnea". _Sleep_. **41** (1). doi:10.1093/sleep/zsx184. PMC 5806568. PMID 29121334.
  9. **^** "Drug Dronabinol Reduces Symptoms of Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Finds Phase 2B Study - Sleep Review". _Sleep Review_. Retrieved 2018-11-04.
  10. **^** "Synthetic Cannabis-Like Drug Reduces Sleep Apnea". _Neuroscience News_. 2017-11-29. Retrieved 2018-11-04.
  11. **^** Carley, DW; Prasad, B; Reid, KJ; Malkani, R; Attarian, H; Abbott, S; Vern, B; Xie, H; Yuan, C (2017-04-28). "0558 DRONABINOL REDUCES AHI AND DAYTIME SLEEPINESS IN PATIENTS WITH MODERATE TO SEVERE OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA SYNDROME". _Sleep_. **40** (suppl_1): A207–A208. doi:10.1093/sleepj/zsx050.557. ISSN 0161-8105.
  12. **^** "Dronabinol capsule (American Health Packaging)". US National Library of Medicine. July 2012. Retrieved 12 January 2014.
  13. **^** 51 Fed. Reg. 17476 (1986), Tuesday, May 13, 1986, pages 17476-17478
  14. **^** Calhoun SR, Galloway GP, Smith DE (1998). "Abuse potential of dronabinol (Marinol)". _Journal of Psychoactive Drugs_. **30** (2): 187–96. doi:10.1080/02791072.1998.10399689. PMID 9692381. [ _better source needed_ ]
  15. **^** "Petition to Reschedule Cannabis (Marijuana)" (PDF). Coalition for Rescheduling Cannabis. 9 October 2002.[ _better source needed_ ]
  16. **^** "WHO Expert Committee on Drug Dependence". World Health Organization. Retrieved 12 January 2014.
  17. **^** EMCDDA, ELDD Comparative Study, May 2002.
  18. **^** "Marinol – the Legal Medical Use for the Marijuana Plant". Drug Enforcement Administration. Archived from the original on 21 October 2002. Retrieved 20 April 2011.
  19. **^** Alchimia Blog, _Marijuana and Medicine: Cesamet, Marinol, Sativex_
  20. **^** Downs, David (21 October 2014). "War on marijuana unconstitutional, doctors testify in federal court Monday". sfgate.com. Retrieved 21 October 2014.
  21. **^** Eustice, Carol (12 August 1997). "Medicinal Marijuana: A Continuing Controversy". About.com. Retrieved 20 April 2011.
  22. **^** Aizpurua-Olaizola O, Soydaner U, Öztürk E, Schibano D, Simsir Y, Navarro P, Etxebarria N, Usobiaga A (February 2016). "Evolution of the Cannabinoid and Terpene Content during the Growth of Cannabis sativa Plants from Different Chemotypes". _Journal of Natural Products_. **79** (2): 324–31. doi:10.1021/acs.jnatprod.5b00949. PMID 26836472.
  23. **^** Pickens JT (April 1981). "Sedative activity of cannabis in relation to its delta'-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol content". _British Journal of Pharmacology_. **72** (4): 649–56. doi:10.1111/j.1476-5381.1981.tb09145.x. PMC 2071638. PMID 6269680.
  24. **^** Burns TL, Ineck JR (February 2006). "Cannabinoid analgesia as a potential new therapeutic option in the treatment of chronic pain". _The Annals of Pharmacotherapy_. **40** (2): 251–60. doi:10.1345/aph.1G217. PMID 16449552.
  25. **^** _MARINOL (dronabinol) capsule_ [ _dead link_ ] drug label/data at Daily Med from U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.
  26. **^** McKim, William A (2002). _Drugs and Behavior: An Introduction to Behavioral Pharmacology_ (5th ed.). Prentice Hall. p. 400. ISBN 978-0-13-048118-4.
  27. **^** Greenberg, Gary (1 November 2005). "Respectable Reefer". Mother Jones. Retrieved 8 April 2010.
  28. **^** "Cannabis and Cannabinoids (PDQ®)". _Cancer Topics_. National Cancer Institute, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
  29. **^** "Government eases restrictions on pot derivative". Online Athens. Archived from the original on 2014-12-16. Retrieved 12 January 2014.

## External links[edit]

  * Medlineplus.gov on Dronabinol

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dronabinol&oldid=900349710"

Categories:

  * Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
  * Amorphous solids
  * Antiemetics
  * Appetite stimulants
  * Aromatase inhibitors
  * Benzochromenes
  * Entheogens
  * Euphoriants
  * Tetrahydrocannabinol

Hidden categories:

  * Pages with archiveurl citation errors
  * All articles lacking reliable references
  * Articles lacking reliable references from June 2011
  * All articles with dead external links
  * Articles with dead external links from May 2017
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018
  * Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011
  * Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016
  * Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Français
  * Italiano
  * Nederlands

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 5 June 2019, at 02:31 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

