

![Merriam-Webster Logo](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/static/app-

standalone-images/MW_logo.png)

SINCE 1828

Menu

  *     *       *   * JOIN MWU 

Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search
features--ad free! JOIN NOW

  * GAMES
  * BROWSE THESAURUS
  * WORD OF THE DAY
  * WORDS AT PLAY
  * MORE __

WORD OF THE DAY WORDS AT PLAY TIME TRAVELER

  * TIME TRAVELER

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

dictionary thesaurus

  * JOIN MWU
  * GAMES
  * THESAURUS
  * WORD OF THE DAY
  * WORDS AT PLAY
  * TIME TRAVELER

Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

# chronic

adjective

chron·​ic | \ ˈkrä-nik ![How to pronounce chronic

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Definition of _chronic_

1a **:** continuing or occurring again and again for a long time chronic
indigestion chronic experiments

b **:** suffering from a chronic disease the special needs of chronic patients

2a **:** always present or encountered especially **:** constantly vexing,
weakening, or troubling chronic petty warfare chronic meddling in one
another's domestic affairs -- Amatzia Baram

b **:** being such habitually a chronic grumbler

Other Words from _chronic_ Synonyms Choose the Right Synonym Did You Know?
More Example Sentences Learn More about _chronic_

Keep scrolling for more

## Other Words from _chronic_

chronic noun

chronically \ ˈkrä-​ni-​k(ə-​)lē ![How to pronounce chronically

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \ adverb

chronicity \ krä-​ˈni-​sə-​tē ![How to pronounce chronicity

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) , krō-​ \ noun

## Synonyms for _chronic_

Synonyms

bred-in-the-bone, confirmed, dyed-in-the-wool, habitual, inveterate

Visit the Thesaurus for More ![](/images/social-icons/double-arrows-

transparent.svg)

## Choose the Right Synonym for _chronic_

inveterate, confirmed, chronic mean firmly established. inveterate applies to
a habit, attitude, or feeling of such long existence as to be practically
ineradicable or unalterable. an _inveterate_ smoker confirmed implies a
growing stronger and firmer with time so as to resist change or reform. a
_confirmed_ bachelor chronic suggests something that is persistent or
endlessly recurrent and troublesome. a _chronic_ complainer

## Did You Know?

Chronic coughing goes on and on; chronic lateness occurs day after day;
chronic lameness never seems to get any better. Unfortunately, situations that
we call chronic almost always seem to be unpleasant. We never hear about
chronic peace, but we do hear about chronic warfare. And we never speak of
chronic health, only of chronic illness.

## Examples of _chronic_ in a Sentence

He suffers from _chronic_ arthritis. a _chronic_ need for attention Inflation
has become a _chronic_ condition in the economy. Don't bother seeing that
film—it's _chronic_.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

Recent Examples on the Web

Psoriasis, a _chronic_ skin condition, can cause red, scaly patches that may
itch, crack, and bleed. -- Claire Gillespie, _SELF_ , "4 Tips for Putting on
Makeup When You Have Psoriasis on Your Face," 24 May 2019 On Tuesday, the same
FDA panel will make recommendations on studying and defining the risks of
long-term _chronic_ conditions with breast implants. -- Matthew Perrone, _The
Seattle Times_ , "US experts: Too soon to pull breast implants tied to
cancer," 26 Mar. 2019 Davidson said, which included _chronic_ lung disease,
neurodevelopment disorder and feeding issues. -- Cathy Free, _The Seattle
Times_ , "Baby born last year weighing less than a soda can heads home for the
first time," 12 Apr. 2019 But the art which resists the slow sap of a
_chronic_ disease—which repairs frames enervated by lust, swollen by gluttony,
or inflamed by wine . . -- Chris Pope, _WSJ_ , "‘More Than Medicine’ Review:
An Ounce of Prevention," 17 Mar. 2019 The issue is when that inflammation
becomes _chronic_ , which may (among other issues) prompt the ovaries to
produce too many androgens, according to the Mayo Clinic. -- Mary Claire
Lagroue, _SELF_ , "Can Diet and Exercise Actually Improve PCOS Symptoms?," 23
Apr. 2019 America’s two biggest pharmacy chains are attempting to reverse
their sagging fortunes by becoming go-to treatment centers for people with
_chronic_ illnesses. -- Sharon Terlep, _WSJ_ , "CVS, Walgreens Look to the
Chronically Ill for a Pharmacy Cure," 4 Apr. 2019 Mindful eating is an
important part of dealing with any kind of _chronic_ illness. -- _Vogue_ ,
"Sea of Shoes’ Jane Aldridge on Her Battle With Endometriosis—And How She’s
Coping With Chronic Pain," 1 Apr. 2019 Kale is linked to reducing your risk of
_chronic_ disease and vision loss, lowering blood pressure, and improving bone
health, FWIW. -- Jaclyn London, Ms, Rd, Cdn, _Good Housekeeping_ , "The New
Dirty Dozen and Clean Fifteen Are Here — But Should You Care?," 20 Mar. 2019

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news
sources to reflect current usage of the word 'chronic.' Views expressed in the
examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send
us feedback.

See More![](/images/show-more.svg)![](/images/show-less.svg)

## First Known Use of _chronic_

1601, in the meaning defined at sense 1a

## History and Etymology for _chronic_

French _chronique_ , from Greek _chronikos_ of time, from _chronos_

Keep scrolling for more

## Learn More about _chronic_

Share _chronic_

Post the Definition of chronic to Facebook ![Facebook](/images/social-

icons/facebook.svg) Share the Definition of chronic on Twitter
![Twitter](/images/social-icons/twitter.svg)

Resources for _chronic_

![Time Traveler](/images/social-icons/time-traveler.svg) Time Traveler!
Explore the year a word first appeared ![](/images/social-icons/double-

arrows.svg)

From the Editors at Merriam-Webster

![alt

5a846cd600bd9](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Is It 'Chronic' or 'Acute'?

### Is It 'Chronic' or 'Acute'?

We hope you don't feel pain of either sort.

![suspect](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Are You Misusing These 10 Common Words?

### Are You Misusing These 10 Common Words?

You keep using that word. I do not think it means what you think it means.

## Dictionary Entries near _chronic_

chronal

chronanagram

chronaxie

chronic

chronic fatigue syndrome

chronicle

chronicle drama

## Statistics for _chronic_

Last Updated

31 May 2019

Look-up Popularity

Time Traveler for _chronic_

## The first known use of _chronic_ was in 1601

See more words from the same year

Keep scrolling for more

More Definitions for _chronic_

chronic

_adjective_

![How to pronounce chronic \(audio\)](/images/audio.svg)

## English Language Learners Definition of _chronic_

medical **:** continuing or occurring again and again for a long time

**:** happening or existing frequently or most of the time

**:** always or often doing something specified

See the full definition for _chronic_ in the English Language Learners
Dictionary

chronic

adjective

chron·​ic | \ ˈkrä-nik ![How to pronounce chronic

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Kids Definition of _chronic_

1 **:** continuing for a long time or returning often a _chronic_ disease

2 **:** happening or done frequently or by habit a _chronic_ complainer
_chronic_ tardiness

Other Words from _chronic_

chronically \ -​ni-​kə-​lē \ adverb

chronic

adjective

chron·​ic | \ ˈkrän-ik ![How to pronounce chronic

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

variants: also chronical \ -​i-​kəl ![How to pronounce chronical

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \

## Medical Definition of _chronic_

(Entry 1 of 2)

1a **:** marked by long duration, by frequent recurrence over a long time, and
often by slowly progressing seriousness **:** not acute chronic indigestion
her hallucinations became chronic

b **:** suffering from a disease or ailment of long duration or frequent
recurrence a chronic arthritic chronic sufferers from asthma

2a **:** having a slow progressive course of indefinite duration --used
especially of degenerative invasive diseases, some infections, psychoses, and
inflammations chronic heart diseasechronic arthritischronic tuberculosis —
compare acute sense 2b(1)

b **:** infected with a disease-causing agent (as a virus) and remaining
infectious over a long period of time but not necessarily expressing symptoms
chronic carriers may remain healthy but still transmit the virus causing
hepatitis B

Other Words from _chronic_

chronically \ -​i-​k(ə-​)lē ![How to pronounce chronically

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \ adverb

chronicity \ krä-​ˈnis-​ət-​ē, krō-​ ![How to pronounce chronicity

\(audio\)](/images/audio.svg) \ noun, plural chronicities

chronic

noun

Medical Definition of _chronic_ (Entry 2 of 2)

**:** one that suffers from a chronic disease

Keep scrolling for more

More from Merriam-Webster on _chronic_

Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for _chronic_

Spanish Central: Translation of _chronic_

Nglish: Translation of _chronic_ for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of _chronic_ for Arabic Speakers

Comments on _chronic_

What made you want to look up _chronic_? Please tell us where you read or
heard it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments ![](/images/show-more.svg) Hide Comments ![](/images/show-

less.svg)

#### WORD OF THE DAY

#### chasten

![Listen to the pronounciation of chasten](/images/audio.svg)

to cause to be more humble or restrained

Get Word of the Day daily email!

#### Test Your Vocabulary

Namesakes Word Quiz

  * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

  * Which of the following is a fruit named after a Moroccan seaport?

  * orange nectarine

  * tangerine clementine

![Name That

Thing](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Test your visual vocabulary with our 10-question challenge!

TAKE THE QUIZ

![Word Winder's

CrossWinder](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

**Test Your Knowledge** \- and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ

TRENDING NOW

  1. folderol Rees-Mogg dismisses Brexit changes 

  2. reticent Mueller's team hesitant to testify 

  3. codify Dem candidates call to protect Roe v. Wade 

SEE ALL

Love words? Need even more definitions?

Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions
and advanced search--ad free!

Merriam-Webster unabridged

Words at Play

  * ![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Your poem could win $$

  * ![woman taking selfie talking to camera](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Words We’re Watching: ‘Velfie’

Be the star of your own movie.

  * ![alt-5cfa906d33a21](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) The Good, The Bad, & The Semantically Imprecise - 6/7/19

Words from the week of 6/7/2019

  * ![air balloons over canyon photo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Does 'Incredible' Mean 'Not Credible'?

It did, once.

Ask the Editors

  * ![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) On Contractions of Multiple Words

You all would not have guessed some of these

  * ![onomatopoeia video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia

Some imitative words are more surprising than others

  * ![video literally](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Literally

How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.

  * ![video his or her](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?

The awkward case of 'his or her'

Word Games

  * ![a citrus fruit possibly named after a person](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Namesakes Word Quiz

When names become words and then we ask you about them.

Take the quiz

  * ![winning words from the national spelling bee logo](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Winning Words from Scripps Spelling Bee Quiz

Can you outdo past winners of the Spelling Bee?

Take the quiz

  * ![Name That Thing](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Name That Thing

Test your visual vocabulary with our 10-question challenge!

Take the quiz

  * ![Word Winder's CrossWinder](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==) Word Winder's CrossWinder

A game of winding words.

Play the game

Merriam Webster

Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

  * SPANISH CENTRAL
  * LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
  * WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
  * VISUAL DICTIONARY

  * SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER

  * MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
  * BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
  * NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION

FOLLOW US

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * YouTube
  * Instagram

  * Browse the Dictionary:

  * a
  * b
  * c
  * d
  * e
  * f
  * g
  * h
  * i
  * j
  * k
  * l
  * m
  * n
  * o
  * p
  * q
  * r
  * s
  * t
  * u
  * v
  * w
  * x
  * y
  * z
  * 0-9

  * Home 

  * Help 
  * Apps 
  * About Us 
  * Shop 
  * Advertising Info 
  * Dictionary API 
  * Contact Us 
  * Video 
  * Favorites 
  * Word of the Year 
  * Law Dictionary 
  * Medical Dictionary 
  * Privacy Policy 
  * Terms of Use

  * Browse the Thesaurus 

  * Browse the Medical Dictionary
  * Browse the Legal Dictionary
  * Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary

© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Learn More from M-W

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

