

  * Dictionary.com
  * Thesaurus.com
  * Everything After Z
    * Word of the Day
    * Video
    * Word Facts
    * Grammar
    * Crossword Solver
    * Daily Crossword
  * All The Words

    * Slang
    * Emoji
    * Gender & Sexuality
    * Acronyms
  * Dictionary.com

  * Thesaurus.com

Try Our Apps

![Dictionary.com](https://www.dictionary.com/assets/dictionary_logo_white-90c1e2eaf84c6abcb80d08d6eb0b6c60.svg)

definitions

Search

  * synonyms

# foolish

[ foo-lish ]SHOW IPA

/ ˈfu lɪʃ /PHONETIC RESPELLING

SYNONYMS|EXAMPLES|WORD ORIGIN

SEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR foolish ON THESAURUS.COM

* * *

### adjective

resulting from or showing a lack of sense; ill-considered; unwise: a foolish
action, a foolish speech.

lacking forethought or caution.

trifling, insignificant, or paltry.

## RELATED CONTENT

The Word Stories Behind The 12 Days Of Christmas GiftsThe likelihood of
finding a partridge in a pear tree is slim, and not just because partridges
aren't big fruit eaters ...

READ MORE

7 Band Names DefinedRead more in this article about some frequently asked
questions and fun facts related to our definitions.

READ MORE

## RELATED WORDS

insane, crazy, stupid, irrational, fantastic, ludicrous, unreasonable,
preposterous, ridiculous, silly, absurd, unwise, ill-advised, asinine,
brainless, daffy, daft, dotty, fatuous, feebleminded

## Nearby words

  1. fool's paradise, 
  2. fool's-parsley, 
  3. foolery, 
  4. foolfish, 
  5. foolhardy, 
  6. foolishly, 
  7. foolproof, 
  8. fools rush in where angels fear to tread, 
  9. fools, feast of, 
  10. foolscap

## Origin of foolish

First recorded in 1250–1300, foolish is from the Middle English word folish,
foolish. See fool1, -ish1

SYNONYMS FOR foolish

1, 2 senseless, vacant, vapid, simple, witless. Foolish, fatuous, silly,
inane, stupid, asinine imply weakness of intellect and lack of judgment.
Foolish implies lack of common sense or good judgment or, sometimes, weakness
of mind: a foolish decision; The child seems foolish. Fatuous implies being
not only foolish, dull, and vacant in mind, but complacent and highly self-
satisfied as well: fatuous and self-important; fatuous answers. Silly denotes
extreme and conspicuous foolishness; it may also refer to pointlessness of
jokes, remarks, etc.: silly and senseless behavior; a perfectly silly
statement. Inane applies to silliness that is notably lacking in content,
sense, or point: inane questions that leave one no reply. Stupid implies
natural slowness or dullness of intellect, or, sometimes, a benumbed or dazed
state of mind; it is also used to mean foolish or silly: well-meaning but
stupid; rendered stupid by a blow; It is stupid to do such a thing. Asinine
originally meant like an ass; it applies to witlessly stupid conversation or
conduct and suggests a lack of social grace or perception: He failed to notice
the reaction to his asinine remarks.

1 imprudent, unreasonable, foolhardy, irrational; thoughtless, nonsensical,
ridiculous, absurd, pointless, preposterous.

SEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR foolish ON THESAURUS.COM

Related forms

fool·ish·ly, adverbfool·ish·ness, nouno·ver·fool·ish,
adjectiveo·ver·fool·ish·ly, adverb

o·ver·fool·ish·ness, nounqua·si-fool·ish, adjectivequa·si-fool·ish·ly,
adverbun·fool·ish, adjectiveun·fool·ish·ly, adverbun·fool·ish·ness, noun

**SEE MORE RELATED FORMS** **SEE FEWER RELATED FORMS**



Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, ©
Random House, Inc. 2019

## Examples from the Web for foolish

  * Sweden explores new frontiers in our misguided, foolish, pointless obsession with rating and censoring entertainment.

The Insane Swedish Plan to Rate Games for Sexism|Nick Gillespie|November 20,
2014|DAILY BEAST

  * One strip, Foolish Grandpa and Sour Henry, shows Grandpa being hit on the head by a sandbag and blown up by dynamite.

The Magazine That Made—and Unmade—Politicians|Anthony Haden-Guest|November 2,
2014|DAILY BEAST

  * McConnell did what he did in 2005, and he was foolish enough to boast about it in public less than two weeks before an election.

Hooray for Liberal Fear-Mongering!|Michael Tomasky|October 28, 2014|DAILY
BEAST

  * The only thing these “tests” reveal is a window into the foolish psyche of whomever applies them.

Ex-NFL Linebacker: We Talk Around Race, Not About It|Carl Banks|October 23,
2014|DAILY BEAST

  * How foolish to ask what is the best education for one or seven or sixty million souls!

College Must Be More Than Just a Classy Trade School|Michael S. Roth|August
30, 2014|DAILY BEAST

  * Now don't be foolish—stay here with Uncle George and the doctor until you cool down.

Kennedy Square|F. Hopkinson Smith

  * Well, of course the saying is foolish, and sounds doubly ridiculous in this age when people believe in neither God nor devil.

The Sorrows of Satan|Marie Corelli

  * “That foolish fellow is going to be late,” he muttered, glancing over his paper at the clock on the chimney-piece.

Post Haste|R.M. Ballantyne

  * I know you'll think I'm foolish, but whenever I look at her portrait I think of him.

The Music Master|Charles Klein

  * I was foolish drunk,' he says, but there was a look in his eyes that was nasty.

Rimrock Trail|J. Allan Dunn

**SEE MORE EXAMPLES** **SEE FEWER EXAMPLES**



Explore Dictionary.com

  * ![The Greatest Language Hits Of Black Music](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/1000x700-universal-music-1-150x150.jpg)

The Greatest Language Hits Of Black Music

  * ![9 Different Ways To Say “Stupid”](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/dork_dweeb_nerd4-150x150.jpg)

9 Different Ways To Say “Stupid”

  * ![Why Is “Bisexual” Such A Charged Word In 2019?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-bisexual-150x150.jpg)

Why Is “Bisexual” Such A Charged Word In 2019?

  * ![Empathy vs. Sympathy: Which Word To Use And When](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/1000x700-empathy-vs-sympathy-150x150.jpg)

Empathy vs. Sympathy: Which Word To Use And When

  * ![Become A \(Dungeon\) Master Of These D&D Slang Terms](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/default_logo_800x800-150x150.jpg)

Become A (Dungeon) Master Of These D&D; Slang Terms

  * ![Redefine Black: Why Dictionary.com Is Updating Its Definition](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/1000x700-redefine-black-v2-150x150.jpg)

Redefine Black: Why Dictionary.com Is Updating Its Definition

## British Dictionary definitions for foolish

## foolish

/ (ˈfuːlɪʃ) /

* * *

### adjective

unwise; silly

resulting from folly or stupidity

ridiculous or absurd; not worthy of consideration

weak-minded; simple

an archaic word for insignificant

Derived Formsfoolishly, adverbfoolishness, noun

Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition ©
William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 © HarperCollins Publishers 1998,
2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012

## Word Origin and History for foolish

## foolish

* * *

adj.

early 14c., from fool (n.) + -ish. Related: Foolishly; foolishness. Old
English words for this were dysig, stunt, dol.

Online Etymology Dictionary, © 2010 Douglas Harper

## Idioms and Phrases with foolish

## foolish

* * *

see penny wise and pound foolish.

The American Heritage® Idioms Dictionary Copyright © 2002, 2001, 1995 by
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. Published by Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt Publishing Company.

Others Are Reading

  * ![This Week’s Quiz Will Fuel Your Inner Fictioneer](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/wotd_1-150x150.gif)

This Week’s Quiz Will Fuel Your Inner Fictioneer

  * ![It’s OK To Use “They” To Describe One Person: Here’s Why](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/1000x700-they-150x150.jpg)

It’s OK To Use “They” To Describe One Person: Here’s Why

WORD OF THE DAY

esprit de l'escalier _noun_ | [es-pree duh le-skahl-yey]SEE DEFINITION

  * ![Have You Ever Mixed Up These Misunderstood Emoji?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-misunderstood-emoji-1-150x150.jpg)

Have You Ever Mixed Up These Misunderstood Emoji?

  * ![What’s The Difference Between “i.e.” And “e.g.”?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/ie-eg-video_v3-1000x700-150x150.jpg)

What’s The Difference Between “i.e.” And “e.g.”?

  * Browse the Dictionary:
  * # 

  * A
  * B
  * C
  * D
  * E
  * F
  * G
  * H
  * I
  * J
  * K
  * L
  * M
  * N
  * O
  * P
  * Q
  * R
  * S
  * T
  * U
  * V
  * W
  * X
  * Y
  * Z

  * Browse by Category:

  * Slang
  * Emoji
  * Acronyms
  * Pop Culture
  * More

  * About

  * Careers
  * Contact Us
  * Cookies, Terms, & Privacy

© 2019 Dictionary.com, LLC

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template

