

# Hallucination

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Perception in the absence of external stimulation that has the qualities of
real perception

For other uses, see Hallucination (disambiguation).

## Hallucination

![August Natterer Meine Augen zur Zeit der

Erscheinungen.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/39/August_Natterer_Meine_Augen_zur_Zeit_der_Erscheinungen.jpg/300px-

August_Natterer_Meine_Augen_zur_Zeit_der_Erscheinungen.jpg)  
_My eyes at the moment of the apparitions_ by August Natterer, a German artist
who created many drawings of his hallucinations.  
Specialty| Psychiatry

A **hallucination** is a perception in the absence of external stimulus that
has qualities of real perception. Hallucinations are vivid, substantial, and
are perceived to be located in external objective space. They are
distinguishable from several related phenomena, such as dreaming, which does
not involve wakefulness; pseudohallucination, which does not mimic real
perception, and is accurately perceived as unreal; illusion, which involves
distorted or misinterpreted real perception; and imagery, which does not mimic
real perception and is under voluntary control.[1] Hallucinations also differ
from "delusional perceptions", in which a correctly sensed and interpreted
stimulus (i.e., a real perception) is given some additional (and typically
absurd) significance.

Hallucinations can occur in any sensory modality—visual, auditory, olfactory,
gustatory, tactile, proprioceptive, equilibrioceptive, nociceptive,
thermoceptive and chronoceptive.

A mild form of hallucination is known as a _disturbance_ , and can occur in
most of the senses above. These may be things like seeing movement in
peripheral vision, or hearing faint noises or voices. Auditory hallucinations
are very common in schizophrenia. They may be benevolent (telling the subject
good things about themselves) or malicious, cursing the subject, etc. Auditory
hallucinations of the malicious type are frequently heard,[ _citation needed_
] for example people talking about the subject behind their back. Like
auditory hallucinations, the source of the visual counterpart can also be
behind the subject's back. Their visual counterpart is the feeling of being
looked or stared at, usually with malicious intent.[ _citation needed_ ]
Frequently, auditory hallucinations and their visual counterpart are
experienced by the subject together.[ _citation needed_ ]

Hypnagogic hallucinations and hypnopompic hallucinations are considered normal
phenomena. Hypnagogic hallucinations can occur as one is falling asleep and
hypnopompic hallucinations occur when one is waking up. Hallucinations can be
associated with drug use (particularly deliriants), sleep deprivation,
psychosis, neurological disorders, and delirium tremens.

The word "hallucination" itself was introduced into the English language by
the 17th-century physician Sir Thomas Browne in 1646 from the derivation of
the Latin word _alucinari_ meaning to wander in the mind. For Browne,
hallucination means a sort of vision that is "depraved and receive[s] its
objects erroneously".[2]

## Contents

  * 1 Classification
    * 1.1 Visual
    * 1.2 Auditory
    * 1.3 Command
    * 1.4 Olfactory
    * 1.5 Tactile
    * 1.6 Gustatory
    * 1.7 General somatic sensations
  * 2 Cause
    * 2.1 Hypnagogic hallucination
    * 2.2 Peduncular hallucinosis
    * 2.3 Delirium tremens
    * 2.4 Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia
    * 2.5 Migraine coma
    * 2.6 Charles Bonnet syndrome
    * 2.7 Focal epilepsy
    * 2.8 Drug-induced hallucination
    * 2.9 Sensory deprivation hallucination
    * 2.10 Experimentally-induced hallucinations
    * 2.11 Non-celiac gluten sensitivity
  * 3 Pathophysiology
    * 3.1 Neuroanatomy
  * 4 Treatments
  * 5 Epidemiology
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References
  * 8 Further reading
  * 9 External links

## Classification[edit]

Hallucinations may be manifested in a variety of forms.[3] Various forms of
hallucinations affect different senses, sometimes occurring simultaneously,
creating multiple sensory hallucinations for those experiencing them.

### Visual[edit]

See also: Visual hallucinations in psychosis, Pareidolia, and Palinopsia

A visual hallucination is "the perception of an external visual stimulus where
none exists".[4] Alternatively, a visual illusion is a distortion of a real
external stimulus. Visual hallucinations are separated into simple and
complex.

  * Simple visual hallucinations (SVH) are also referred to as non-formed visual hallucinations and elementary visual hallucinations. These terms refer to lights, colors, geometric shapes, and indiscrete objects. These can be further subdivided into phosphenes which are SVH without structure, and photopsias which are SVH with geometric structures.
  * Complex visual hallucinations (CVH) are also referred to as formed visual hallucinations. CVHs are clear, lifelike images or scenes such as people, animals, objects, places, etc.

For example, one may report hallucinating a giraffe. A simple visual
hallucination is an amorphous figure that may have a similar shape or color to
a giraffe ( _looks like_ a giraffe), while a complex visual hallucination is a
discrete, lifelike image that _is_ , unmistakably, a giraffe.

### Auditory[edit]

Main article: Auditory hallucination

Auditory hallucinations (also known as _paracusia_ )[5] are the perception of
sound without outside stimulus. Auditory hallucinations are the most common
type of hallucination.[6] Auditory hallucinations can be divided into two
categories: elementary and complex. Elementary hallucinations are the
perception of sounds such as hissing, whistling, an extended tone, and more.
In many cases, tinnitus is an elementary auditory hallucination. However, some
people who experience certain types of tinnitus, especially pulsatile
tinnitus, are actually hearing the blood rushing through vessels near the ear.
Because the auditory stimulus is present in this situation, it does not
qualify it as a hallucination.

Complex hallucinations are those of voices, music, or other sounds that may or
may not be clear, may be familiar or completely unfamiliar, and friendly or
aggressive, among other possibilities. A hallucination of a single individual
person of one or more talking voices is particularly associated with psychotic
disorders such as schizophrenia, and hold special significance in diagnosing
these conditions.

If a group of people experience a complex auditory hallucination, no single
individual can be named psychotic or schizophrenic.[7][8][9][10]

Another typical disorder where auditory hallucinations are very common is
dissociative identity disorder. In schizophrenia voices are normally perceived
coming from outside the person but in dissociative disorders they are
perceived as originating from within the person, commenting in their head
instead of behind their back. Differential diagnosis between schizophrenia and
dissociative disorders is challenging due to many overlapping symptoms,
especially Schneiderian first rank symptoms such as hallucinations.[11]
However, many people not suffering from diagnosable mental illness may
sometimes hear voices as well.[12] One important example to consider when
forming a differential diagnosis for a patient with paracusia is lateral
temporal lobe epilepsy. Despite the tendency to associate hearing voices, or
otherwise hallucinating, and psychosis with schizophrenia or other psychiatric
illnesses, it is crucial to take into consideration that, even if a person
does exhibit psychotic features, he/she does not necessarily suffer from a
psychiatric disorder on its own. Disorders such as Wilson's disease, various
endocrine diseases, numerous metabolic disturbances, multiple sclerosis,
systemic lupus erythematosus, porphyria, sarcoidosis, and many others can
present with psychosis.

Musical hallucinations are also relatively common in terms of complex auditory
hallucinations and may be the result of a wide range of causes ranging from
hearing-loss (such as in musical ear syndrome, the auditory version of Charles
Bonnet syndrome), lateral temporal lobe epilepsy,[13] arteriovenous
malformation,[14] stroke, lesion, abscess, or tumor.[15]

The Hearing Voices Movement is a support and advocacy group for people who
hallucinate voices, but do not otherwise show signs of mental illness or
impairment.

High caffeine consumption has been linked to an increase in the likelihood of
one's experiencing auditory hallucinations. A study conducted by the La Trobe
University School of Psychological Sciences revealed that as few as five cups
of coffee a day (approximately 500 mg of caffeine) could trigger the
phenomenon.[16]

### Command[edit]

Command hallucinations are hallucinations in the form of commands; they can be
auditory or inside of the person's mind or consciousness.[17] The contents of
the hallucinations can range from the innocuous to commands to cause harm to
the self or others.[17] Command hallucinations are often associated with
schizophrenia. People experiencing command hallucinations may or may not
comply with the hallucinated commands, depending on the circumstances.
Compliance is more common for non-violent commands.[18]

Command hallucinations are sometimes used to defend a crime that has been
committed, often homicides.[19] In essence, it is a voice that one hears and
it tells the listener what to do. Sometimes the commands are quite benign
directives such as "Stand up" or "Shut the door."[20] Whether it is a command
for something simple or something that is a threat, it is still considered a
"command hallucination." Some helpful questions that can assist one in
figuring out if he/she may be suffering from this include: "What are the
voices telling you to do?", "When did your voices first start telling you to
do things?", "Do you recognize the person who is telling you to harm yourself
(or others)?", "Do you think you can resist doing what the voices are telling
you to do?"[20]

### Olfactory[edit]

Main articles: Phantosmia and Parosmia

Phantosmia (olfactory hallucinations), smelling an odor that is not actually
there,[21] and parosmia (olfactory illusions), inhaling a real odor but
perceiving it as different scent than remembered,[22] are distortions to the
sense of smell (olfactory system) that, in most cases, are not caused by
anything serious and usually go away on their own in time.[21] It can result
from a range of conditions such as nasal infections, nasal polyps, dental
problems, migraines, head injuries, seizures, strokes, or brain
tumors.[21][23] Environmental exposures are sometimes the cause as well, such
as smoking, exposure to certain types of chemicals (e.g., insecticides or
solvents), or radiation treatment for head or neck cancer.[21] It can also be
a symptom of certain mental disorders such as depression, bipolar disorder,
intoxication or withdrawal from drugs and alcohol, or psychotic disorders
(e.g., schizophrenia).[23] The perceived odors are usually unpleasant and
commonly described as smelling burned, foul spoiled, or rotten.[21]

### Tactile[edit]

Main article: Tactile hallucination

Tactile hallucinations are the illusion of tactile sensory input, simulating
various types of pressure to the skin or other organs. One subtype of tactile
hallucination, formication, is the sensation of insects crawling underneath
the skin and is frequently associated with prolonged cocaine use.[24] However,
formication may also be the result of normal hormonal changes such as
menopause, or disorders such as peripheral neuropathy, high fevers, Lyme
disease, skin cancer, and more.[24]

### Gustatory[edit]

This type of hallucination is the perception of taste without a stimulus.
These hallucinations, which are typically strange or unpleasant, are
relatively common among individuals who have certain types of focal epilepsy,
especially temporal lobe epilepsy. The regions of the brain responsible for
gustatory hallucination in this case are the insula and the superior bank of
the sylvian fissure.[25][26]

### General somatic sensations[edit]

General somatic sensations of a hallucinatory nature are experienced when an
individual feels that their body is being mutilated, i.e. twisted, torn, or
disembowelled. Other reported cases are invasion by animals in the person's
internal organs such as snakes in the stomach or frogs in the rectum. The
general feeling that one's flesh is decomposing is also classified under this
type of hallucination.[26][ _citation needed_ ]

## Cause[edit]

See also: Psychosis (causes)

Hallucinations can be caused by a number of factors.

### Hypnagogic hallucination[edit]

Main article: Hypnagogia

These hallucinations occur just before falling asleep, and affect a high
proportion of the population: in one survey 37% of the respondents experienced
them twice a week.[27] The hallucinations can last from seconds to minutes;
all the while, the subject usually remains aware of the true nature of the
images. These may be associated with narcolepsy. Hypnagogic hallucinations are
sometimes associated with brainstem abnormalities, but this is rare.[28]

### Peduncular hallucinosis[edit]

Main article: Peduncular hallucinosis

Peduncular means pertaining to the peduncle, which is a neural tract running
to and from the pons on the brain stem. These hallucinations usually occur in
the evenings, but not during drowsiness, as in the case of hypnagogic
hallucination. The subject is usually fully conscious and then can interact
with the hallucinatory characters for extended periods of time. As in the case
of hypnagogic hallucinations, insight into the nature of the images remains
intact. The false images can occur in any part of the visual field, and are
rarely polymodal.[28]

### Delirium tremens[edit]

Main article: Delirium tremens

One of the more enigmatic forms of visual hallucination is the highly
variable, possibly polymodal delirium tremens. Individuals suffering from
delirium tremens may be agitated and confused, especially in the later stages
of this disease. Insight is gradually reduced with the progression of this
disorder. Sleep is disturbed and occurs for a shorter period of time, with
rapid eye movement sleep.

### Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia[edit]

Parkinson's disease is linked with Lewy body dementia for their similar
hallucinatory symptoms. The symptoms strike during the evening in any part of
the visual field, and are rarely polymodal. The segue into hallucination may
begin with illusions[29] where sensory perception is greatly distorted, but no
novel sensory information is present. These typically last for several
minutes, during which time the subject may be either conscious and normal or
drowsy/inaccessible. Insight into these hallucinations is usually preserved
and REM sleep is usually reduced. Parkinson's disease is usually associated
with a degraded substantia nigra pars compacta, but recent evidence suggests
that PD affects a number of sites in the brain. Some places of noted
degradation include the median raphe nuclei, the noradrenergic parts of the
locus coeruleus, and the cholinergic neurons in the parabrachial area and
pedunculopontine nuclei of the tegmentum.[28]

### Migraine coma[edit]

See also: Migraine aura and Scintillating scotoma

This type of hallucination is usually experienced during the recovery from a
comatose state. The migraine coma can last for up to two days, and a state of
depression is sometimes comorbid. The hallucinations occur during states of
full consciousness, and insight into the hallucinatory nature of the images is
preserved. It has been noted that ataxic lesions accompany the migraine
coma.[28]

### Charles Bonnet syndrome[edit]

Charles Bonnet syndrome is the name given to visual hallucinations experienced
by a partially or severely sight impaired person. The hallucinations can occur
at any time and can distress people of any age, as they may not initially be
aware that they are hallucinating, they may fear initially for their own
mental health which may delay them sharing with carers what is happening until
they start to understand it themselves. The hallucinations can frighten and
disconcert as to what is real and what is not and carers need to learn how to
support sufferers. The hallucinations can sometimes be dispersed by eye
movements, or perhaps just reasoned logic such as, "I can see fire but there
is no smoke and there is no heat from it" or perhaps "We have an infestation
of rats but they have pink ribbons with a bell tied on their necks." Over
elapsed months and years the manifestation of the hallucinations may change,
becoming more or less frequent with changes in ability to see. The length of
time that the sight impaired person can suffer from these hallucinations
varies according to the underlying speed of eye deterioration. A differential
diagnosis are ophthalmopathic hallucinations.[30]

### Focal epilepsy[edit]

Visual hallucinations due to focal seizures differ depending on the region of
the brain where the seizure occurs. For example, visual hallucinations during
occipital lobe seizures are typically visions of brightly colored, geometric
shapes that may move across the visual field, multiply, or form concentric
rings and generally persist from a few seconds to a few minutes. They are
usually unilateral and localized to one part of the visual field on the
contralateral side of the seizure focus, typically the temporal field.
However, unilateral visions moving horizontally across the visual field begin
on the contralateral side and move toward the ipsilateral side.[25][31]

Temporal lobe seizures, on the other hand, can produce complex visual
hallucinations of people, scenes, animals, and more as well as distortions of
visual perception. Complex hallucinations may appear to be real or unreal, may
or may not be distorted with respect to size, and may seem disturbing or
affable, among other variables. One rare but notable type of hallucination is
heautoscopy, a hallucination of a mirror image of one's self. These "other
selves" may be perfectly still or performing complex tasks, may be an image of
a younger self or the present self, and tend to be only briefly present.
Complex hallucinations are a relatively uncommon finding in temporal lobe
epilepsy patients. Rarely, they may occur during occipital focal seizures or
in parietal lobe seizures.[25]

Distortions in visual perception during a temporal lobe seizure may include
size distortion (micropsia or macropsia), distorted perception of movement
(where moving objects may appear to be moving very slowly or to be perfectly
still), a sense that surfaces such as ceilings and even entire horizons are
moving farther away in a fashion similar to the dolly zoom effect, and other
illusions.[32] Even when consciousness is impaired, insight into the
hallucination or illusion is typically preserved.

### Drug-induced hallucination[edit]

Main article: Hallucinogen

Drug-induced hallucinations are caused by hallucinogens, dissociatives,
deliriants including many drugs with anticholinergic actions and certain
stimulants, which are known to cause visual and auditory hallucinations. Some
psychedelics such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and psilocybin can cause
hallucinations that range from a spectrum of mild to severe.

Hallucinations, pseudohallucinations, or intensification of pareidolia,
particularly auditory, are known side effects of opioids to different
degrees—it may be associated with the absolute degree of agonism or antagonism
of especially the kappa opioid receptor, sigma receptors, delta opioid
receptor and the NMDA receptors or the overall receptor activation profile as
synthetic opioids like those of the pentazocine, levorphanol, fentanyl,
pethidine, methadone and some other families are more associated with this
side effect than natural opioids like morphine and codeine and semi-synthetics
like hydromorphone, amongst which there also appears to be a stronger
correlation with the relative analgesic strength. Three opioids, Cyclazocine
(a benzormorphan opioid/pentazocine relative) and two levorphanol-related
morphinan opioids, Cyclorphan and Dextrorphan are classified as hallucinogens,
and Dextromethorphan as a dissociative.[33][34][35][36] These drugs also can
induce sleep (relating to hypnagogic hallucinations) and especially the
pethidines have atropine-like anticholinergic activity, which was possibly
also a limiting factor in the use, the psychotomometic side effects of
potentiating morphine, oxycodone, and other opioids with scopolamine
(respectively in the Twilight Sleep technique and the combination drug
Skophedal, which was eukodal (oxycodone), scopolamine and ephedrine, called
the "wonder drug of the 1930s" after its invention in Germany in 1928, but
only rarely specially compounded today) (q.q.v.).[37]

### Sensory deprivation hallucination[edit]

Hallucinations can be caused by sense deprivation when it occurs for prolonged
periods of time, and almost always occur in the modality being deprived
(visual for blindfolded/darkness, auditory for muffled conditions, etc.)[
_citation needed_ ]

### Experimentally-induced hallucinations[edit]

Main article: Hallucinations in the sane

**Anomalous experiences** , such as so-called benign hallucinations, may occur
in a person in a state of good mental and physical health, even in the
apparent absence of a transient trigger factor such as fatigue, intoxication
or sensory deprivation.

The evidence for this statement has been accumulating for more than a century.
Studies of benign hallucinatory experiences go back to 1886 and the early work
of the Society for Psychical Research,[38][39] which suggested approximately
10% of the population had experienced at least one hallucinatory episode in
the course of their life. More recent studies have validated these findings;
the precise incidence found varies with the nature of the episode and the
criteria of "hallucination" adopted, but the basic finding is now well-
supported.[40]

### Non-celiac gluten sensitivity[edit]

There is tentative evidence of a relationship with non-celiac gluten
sensitivity, the so-called "gluten psychosis".[41]

## Pathophysiology[edit]

### Neuroanatomy[edit]

Hallucinations are associated with structural and functional abnormalities in
primary and secondary sensory cortices. Reduced grey matter in regions of the
superior temporal gyrus/middle temporal gyrus, including broca's area, is
associated with auditory hallucinations as a trait, while acute hallucinations
are associated with increased activity in the same regions along with the
hippocampus, parahippocampus, and the right hemispheric homologue of broca's
area in the inferior frontal gyrus.[42] Grey and white matter abnormalities in
visual regions are associated with visual hallucinations in diseases such as
alzheimer's disease, further supporting the notion of dysfunction in sensory
regions underlying hallucinations.[43]

One proposed model of hallucinations posits that overactivity in sensory
regions, which is normally attributed to internal sources via feedforward
networks to the inferior frontal gyrus, is interpreted as originating
externally due to abnormal connectivity or functionality of the feedforward
network.[42] This is supported by cognitive studies those with hallucinations,
who demonstrate abnormal attribution of self generated stimuli.[44]

Disruptions in thalamocortical circuitry may underlie the observed top down
and bottom up dysfunction.[45] Thalamocortical circuits, composed of
projections between thalamic and cortical neurons and adjacent interneurons,
underlie certain electrophysical characteristics(gamma oscillations) that are
underlie sensory processing. Cortical inputs to thalamic neurons enable
attentional modulation of sensory neurons. Dysfunction in sensory afferents,
and abnormal cortical input may result in pre-existing expectations modulating
sensory experience, potentially resulting in the generation of hallucinations.
Hallucinations are associated with less accurate sensory processing, and more
intense stimuli with less interference are necessary for accurate processing
and the appearance of gamma oscillations(called "gamma synchrony").
Hallucinations are also associated with the absence of reduction in P50
amplitude in response to the presentation of a second stimuli after an initial
stimulus; this is thought to represent failure to gate sensory stimuli, and
can be exacerbated by dopamine release agents.[46]

Abnormal assignment of salience to stimuli may be one mechanism of
hallucinations. Dysfunctional dopamine signaling may lead to abnormal top down
regulation of sensory processing, allowing expectations to distort sensory
input.[47]

## Treatments[edit]

There are few treatments for many types of hallucinations. However, for those
hallucinations caused by mental disease, a psychologist or psychiatrist should
be consulted, and treatment will be based on the observations of those
doctors. Antipsychotic and atypical antipsychotic medication may also be
utilized to treat the illness if the symptoms are severe and cause significant
distress.[ _citation needed_ ] For other causes of hallucinations there is no
factual evidence to support any one treatment is scientifically tested and
proven. However, abstaining from hallucinogenic drugs, stimulant drugs,
managing stress levels, living healthily, and getting plenty of sleep can help
reduce the prevalence of hallucinations. In all cases of hallucinations,
medical attention should be sought out and informed of one's specific
symptoms.

## Epidemiology[edit]

![Crystal Clear app

kedit.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/e/e8/Crystal_Clear_app_kedit.svg/40px-

Crystal_Clear_app_kedit.svg.png)

|

This Hallucination#Epidemiology may need to be **rewritten entirely** to
comply with Wikipedia's quality standards, as disjointed and makes no sense.
You can help. The discussion page may contain suggestions. _( January 2019)_

\---|---

One study from as early as 1895[48] reported a much higher figure,[
_clarification needed_ ] with almost 39% of people reporting hallucinatory
experiences, 27% of which daytime hallucinations, mostly outside the context
of illness or drug use. From this survey, olfactory (smell) and gustatory
(taste) hallucinations seem the most common in the general population.

## See also[edit]

  * Phantosmia
  * Pseudohallucination
  * Closed-eye hallucination
  * Dimethyltryptamine
  * Folie à deux
  * Ganzfeld effect
  * Hallucinogenic fish
  * Hallucinations in the sane
  * Hypnagogia
  * Microwave auditory effect
  * Phantom eye syndrome
  * Prisoner's cinema
  * Psychedelic experience
  * Psychotic depression
  * Simulated reality
  * Vision (spirituality)
  * Schizophrenia
  * Bicameralism (psychology)

  * Apparitional experience

## References[edit]

  1. **^** Leo P. W. Chiu (1989). "Differential diagnosis and management of hallucinations" (PDF). _Journal of the Hong Kong Medical Association_. **t 41** (3): 292–7.
  2. **^** Browne, Thomas (1646). _Pseudodoxia Epidemica._ Book III, chapter XVIII: That Moles are blinde and have no eyes.
  3. **^** Chen E, Berrios GE (1996). "Recognition of hallucinations: a multidimensional model and methodology". _Psychopathology_. **29** (1): 54–63. doi:10.1159/000284972. PMID 8711076.
  4. **^** Pelak, Victoria. "Approach to the patient with visual hallucinations". _www.uptodate.com_. Archived from the original on 2014-08-26. Retrieved 2014-08-25.
  5. **^** "Paracusia". thefreedictionary.com.
  6. **^** Nolen-Hoeksema, Susan (2014). _Abnormal Psychology_ (6e ed.). McGraw-Hill. p. 283.
  7. **^** "Rescuers heard a voice" Ben Brumfield, CNN March 9, 2015 Archived March 10, 2015, at the Wayback Machine
  8. **^** "'Mysterious voice' led Utah Officers to child who survived for 14 hours in submerged car" Joel Landau, New York Daily News, March 9, 2015 Archived June 28, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
  9. **^** "Lily Groesbeck Rescue" NBC news Archived 2016-08-12 at the Wayback Machine
  10. **^** "Rescuers recall 'distinct voice' that spurred them to rescue trapped toddler - KSL.com". _ksl.com_.
  11. **^** Shibayama M (2011). "Differential diagnosis between dissociative disorders and schizophrenia". _Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi_. **113** (9): 906–911. PMID 22117396.
  12. **^** Thompson, Andrea (September 15, 2006). "Hearing Voices: Some People Like It". LiveScience.com. Archived from the original on November 2, 2006. Retrieved 2006-11-25.
  13. **^** Engmann, Birk; Reuter, Mike: "Spontaneous perception of melodies – hallucination or epilepsy?" _Nervenheilkunde_ 2009 Apr 28: 217-221. ISSN 0722-1541
  14. **^** Ozsarac M, Aksay E, Kiyan S, Unek O, Gulec FF (2012). "De novo cerebral arteriovenous malformation: Pink Floyd's song "Brick in the Wall" as a warning sign". _The Journal of Emergency Medicine_. **43** (1): e17–20. doi:10.1016/j.jemermed.2009.05.035. PMID 19682829.
  15. **^** "Rare Hallucinations Make Music In The Mind". ScienceDaily.com. August 9, 2000. Archived from the original on December 5, 2006. Retrieved 2006-12-31.
  16. **^** Medical News Today: "Too Much Coffee Can Make You Hear Things That Are Not There" Archived 2013-03-11 at the Wayback Machine
  17. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Beck-Sander A, Birchwood M, Chadwick P (1997). "Acting on command hallucinations: A cognitive approach". _The British Journal of Clinical Psychology_. **36** (1): 139–48. doi:10.1111/j.2044-8260.1997.tb01237.x. PMID 9051285.
  18. **^** Lee TM, Chong SA, Chan YH, Sathyadevan G (2004). "Command hallucinations among Asian patients with schizophrenia". _The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry_. **49** (12): 838–42. doi:10.1177/070674370404901207. PMID 15679207.
  19. **^** Knoll, James L.; Resnick, Phillip J. (2008). "Insanity Defense Evaluations: Toward a Model for Evidence-Based Practice". _Brief Treatment and Crisis Intervention_. **8** (1): 92–110. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.606.6552. doi:10.1093/brief-treatment/mhm024.
  20. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Shea, Sean Christopher. "M.D". Archived from the original on 2014-01-02.
  21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ HealthUnlocked (2014), "Phantosmia (Smelling Odours That Aren't There)", _NHS Choices_ , archived from the original on 2 August 2016, retrieved 6 August 2016
  22. **^** Hong, Seok-Chan; Holbrook, Eric H.; Leopold, Donald A.; Hummel, Thomas (2012), "Distorted Olfactory Perception: A Systematic Review", _Acta Oto-Laryngologica Supplementum_ , **132** (S1): S27
  23. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Leopold, D. A. (2002), "Distortion of Olfactory Perception: Diagnosis and Treatment", _Chemical Senses_ , **27** (7): 611–615, doi:10.1093/chemse/27.7.611, PMID 12200340
  24. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Berrios GE (April 1982). "Tactile hallucinations: conceptual and historical aspects". _Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry_. **45** (4): 285–93. doi:10.1136/jnnp.45.4.285. PMC 491362. PMID 7042917.
  25. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Panayiotopoulos CP (2007). _A clinical guide to epileptic syndromes and their treatment_ (2nd ed.). London: Springer. ISBN 978-1846286438. "based on the ILAE classification and practice parameter guidelines"
  26. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Barker P (1997). _Assessment in psychiatric and mental health nursing: in search of the whole person_. Cheltenham, UK: Stanley Thornes Publishers. p. 245. ISBN 978-0748731749.
  27. **^** Ohayon MM, Priest RG, Caulet M, Guilleminault C (1996). "Hypnagogic and Hypnopompic Hallucinations: Pathological Phenomena?". _British Journal of Psychiatry_. **169** (4): 459–67. doi:10.1192/bjp.169.4.459. PMID 8894197.
  28. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ Manford, M (1998). "Complex visual hallucinations. Clinical and neurobiological insights". _Brain_. **121** (10): 1819–40. doi:10.1093/brain/121.10.1819. PMID 9798740.
  29. **^** Mark Derr (2006) Archived 2011-09-26 at the Wayback Machine "Marilyn and Me," _The New York Times_ , February 14, 2006 

  30. **^** Engmann, Birk (2008). "Phosphene und Photopsien – Okzipitallappeninfarkt oder Reizdeprivation?" [Phosphenes and photopsias - ischaemic origin or sensorial deprivation? - Case history]. _Zeitschrift für Neuropsychologie_ (in German). **19** (1): 7–13. doi:10.1024/1016-264X.19.1.7.

  31. **^** Teeple RC, Caplan JP, Stern TA (2009). "Visual Hallucinations: Differential Diagnosis and Treatment". _The Primary Care Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry_. **11** (1): 26–32. doi:10.4088/PCC.08r00673. PMC 2660156. PMID 19333408.
  32. **^** Bien CG, Benninger FO, Urbach H, Schramm J, Kurthen M, Elger CE (2000). "Localizing value of epileptic visual auras". _Brain_. **123** (2): 244–253. doi:10.1093/brain/123.2.244. PMID 10648433.
  33. **^** "Fentanyl (Transdermal Route) Side Effects - Mayo Clinic". Archived from the original on 2018-04-24. Retrieved 2018-04-24.
  34. **^** "Fentanyl hallucinations - MedHelp". Archived from the original on 2018-04-25. Retrieved 2018-04-24.
  35. **^** "Talwin Injection - FDA prescribing information, side effects and uses". Archived from the original on 2018-05-09. Retrieved 2018-04-24.
  36. **^** "Prescription Drugs That Can Cause Hallucinations". _azcentral.com_.
  37. **^** Trauner, Richard; Obwegeser, Hugo (1957). "The surgical correction of mandibular prognathism and retrognathia with consideration of genioplasty". _Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology_. **10** (7): 677–89, contd. doi:10.1016/S0030-4220(57)80063-2. PMID 13441284.
  38. **^** Gurney, E., Myers, F.W.H. and Podmore, F. (1886). _Phantasms of the Living_ , Vols. I and II. London: Trubner and Co..
  39. **^** Sidgwick, Eleanor; Johnson, Alice; and others (1894). Report on the Census of Hallucinations, London: _Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research_ , Vol. X.
  40. **^** See Slade, P.D. and Bentall, R.P. (1988). _Sensory Deception: a scientific analysis of hallucination_. London: Croom Helm, for a review.
  41. **^** Losurdo G, Principi M, Iannone A, Amoruso A, Ierardi E, Di Leo A, et al. (2018). "Extra-intestinal manifestations of non-celiac gluten sensitivity: An expanding paradigm". _World J Gastroenterol_ (Review). **24** (14): 1521–1530. doi:10.3748/wjg.v24.i14.1521. PMC 5897856. PMID 29662290.
  42. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Brown, Gregory; Thompson, Wesley. "Functional Brain Imaging in Schizophrenia: Selected Results and Methods". In Swerdlow, Neal (ed.). _Behavioral Neurobiology of Schizophrenia and its Treatment_. Springer. pp. 185–189.
  43. **^** Schmoldt, A; Benthe, HF; Haberland, G (1 September 1975). "Digitoxin metabolism by rat liver microsomes". _Biochemical Pharmacology_. **24** (17): 1639–41. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2007.07.012. PMID 17884165.
  44. **^** Boksa, P (July 2009). "On the neurobiology of hallucinations". _Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience_. **34** (4): 260–2. PMC 2702442. PMID 19568476.
  45. **^** Kumar, S; Soren, S; Chaudhury, S (July 2009). "Hallucinations: Etiology and clinical implications". _Industrial Psychiatry Journal_. **18** (2): 119–26. doi:10.4103/0972-6748.62273. PMC 2996210. PMID 21180490.
  46. **^** Behrendt, RP (May 2006). "Dysregulation of thalamic sensory "transmission" in schizophrenia: neurochemical vulnerability to hallucinations". _Journal of Psychopharmacology (Oxford, England)_. **20** (3): 356–72. doi:10.1177/0269881105057696. PMID 16174672.
  47. **^** Aleman, Andre; Vercammon, Ans. "The Bottom Up and Top Down Components of Hallucinatory Phenomenon". In Jardri, R; Cachia, A; Pins, D; Thomas, P (eds.). _The Neuroscience of Hallucinations_. Springer.
  48. **^** Ohayon, Maurice M (2000). "Prevalence of hallucinations and their pathological associations in the general population". _Psychiatry Research_. **97** (2–3): 153–64. doi:10.1016/S0165-1781(00)00227-4. PMID 11166087.

## Further reading[edit]

  * Johnson FH (1978). _The Anatomy of Hallucinations_. Chicago: Nelson-Hall Co. ISBN 0-88229-155-6.
  * Bentall RP, Slade PD (1988). Sensory Deception: A Scientific Analysis of Hallucination _. London: Croom Helm.ISBN 0-7099-3961-2._
  * Aleman A, Larøi F (2008). _Hallucinations: The Science of Idiosyncratic Perception_. American Psychological Association (APA). ISBN 1-4338-0311-9.
  * Sacks O (2012). _Hallucinations_. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0307957245

## External links[edit]

Classification|

D

  * **ICD-10** : R44
  * **ICD-9-CM** : 780.1
  * **MeSH** : D006212
  * **DiseasesDB** : 19769

\---|---  
External resources|

  * **MedlinePlus** : 003258
  * **Patient UK** : Hallucination

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to
_**Hallucination**_.  
\---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-

logo.svg/34px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) | Wikiquote has quotations related to:
_**Hallucination**_  
\---|---

  * Hearing Voices Network
  * "Anthropology and Hallucinations; chapter from _The Making of Religion_ ". _psychanalyse-paris.com_. November 4, 2006. Retrieved October 4, 2016.
  * "The voice inside: A practical guide to coping with hearing voices"
  * Psychology Terms
  * Hallucination: A Normal Phenomenon?
  * Fasting-induced hallucination
  * Geometric visual hallucinations, Euclidean symmetry and the functional architecture of striate cortex

  * v

  * t
  * e

Symptoms and signs: cognition, perception, emotional state and behaviour
(R40–R46, 780.0–780.5, 781.1)

* * *

Cognition|

| Alteration of  
consciousness|

  * Confusion (Delirium)
  * Obtundation
  * Psychosis
    * Delusions
  * Somnolence
  * Stupor
    * Sopor
  * Unconsciousness
    * Coma
    * Persistent vegetative state
    * Sleep
    * Syncope

\---|---  
Fainting/Syncope|

  * Carotid sinus syncope
  * Heat syncope
  * Vasovagal episode

Other|

  * Amnesia
    * Anterograde amnesia
    * Retrograde amnesia
  * Convulsion
  * Dizziness
    * Disequilibrium
    * Presyncope/Lightheadedness
    * Vertigo

Emotional state|

  * Anger
  * Anxiety
  * Depression
  * Fear
    * Paranoia
  * Hostility
  * Irritability
  * Suicidal ideation

Behavior|

  * Verbosity
  * Russell's sign

Perception/  
sensation  
disorder|

  * Hallucination (Auditory hallucination)

  * Olfaction

    * Anosmia
    * Hyposmia
    * Dysosmia
    * Parosmia
    * Phantosmia
    * Hyperosmia
  * Synesthesia

  * Taste

    * Ageusia
    * Hypogeusia
    * Dysgeusia
    * Parageusia
    * Hypergeusia

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

  * GND: 4137656-0
  * NDL: 01034723

\---|---

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hallucination&oldid=895848133"

Categories:

  * Hallucinations
  * Medical signs
  * Symptoms and signs: Cognition, perception, emotional state and behaviour

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * CS1 German-language sources (de)
  * Articles with short description
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016
  * Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017
  * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2011
  * Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from January 2019
  * All articles needing rewrite
  * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2019
  * Commons category link from Wikidata
  * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikiquote

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * العربية
  * Asturianu
  * Azərbaycanca
  * Беларуская
  * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
  * Български
  * Bosanski
  * Català
  * Čeština
  * Cymraeg
  * Dansk
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * Español
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * فارسی
  * Français
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * 한국어
  * Հայերեն
  * हिन्दी
  * Hrvatski
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * ಕನ್ನಡ
  * ქართული
  * Қазақша
  * Kurdî
  * Кыргызча
  * Latina
  * Latviešu
  * Lëtzebuergesch
  * Лезги
  * Lietuvių
  * Magyar
  * Македонски
  * मराठी
  * مصرى
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Nederlands
  * 日本語
  * Norsk
  * Occitan
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Română
  * Русский
  * Simple English
  * Slovenčina
  * Slovenščina
  * کوردی
  * Српски / srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * தமிழ்
  * తెలుగు
  * Türkçe
  * Українська
  * اردو
  * Tiếng Việt
  * Zazaki
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 6 May 2019, at 21:21 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template *[e]: Edit this template

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template

