

Increasing Fertility | Fertility Awareness | Cervical Dysplasia | Herbal
Contraception | Herbal Abortion | Suggested Reading | Book Store | Search  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--- 

* * *

_**Once you make a decision, the universe conspires to make it happen.**_  
~Ralph Waldo Emerson~

Stuck in someone's frames?  
Click here to break out

## A WORD ABOUT PREGNANCY TERMINATION

There's definitely more than one way to end an unwanted pregnancy, especially
when it very early in pregnancy. The earlier the pregnancy is the better the
chances some methods have of working. First there's the standard clinical
abortion(s), there are several types available and which one is used depends
on how far along the pregnancy is and to a lesser extent the clinic offering
services. For more information on ending pregnancies in the first trimester
please visit these websites, also please keep in mind Abortion Pill options
are available up to the 7th week of pregnancy (9 weeks LMP), so the earlier it
is the more options you have available.

One other thing that I want to mention up front to help avoid confusion when
dealing with the medical establishment. Doctors, nurses, clinics etc, will
count the weeks of pregnancy based on when your **last menstrual period**
started. This is referred to as LMP. So when a Dr tells you how many weeks
pregnant you are, it will be based on this. On this website, I start counting
the weeks of pregnancy from when conception occurs, so there will be a two
week difference in most cases. Doctors of course assume that every woman has
the text book 28 day cycle. Of course, we know differently, every woman's
cycle is unique to her and those who chart their own cycles will know what is
normal for them, which may or may not fall into the textbook 28 day cycle.

Available Options:

        
                * Planned Parenthood - First Trimester Options
        * Feminist Women's Health Centers - Abortion Information
        * Some Doctors offer services right in their own office, such as the Aspiration which is pretty much the same as a Menstrual Extraction, except that they use an instrument to open the cervix, where menstrual extraction does not. Here's a clinic in NYC that offers Aspiration. Early Options
        * A list of Clinics that offer Methotrexate & Mifepristone
        * A list of Clinics that offer Ru-486
        

There's lots of info out there on these so its not anything I'll get into
here, the options I'd like to share are not commonly known but are
occasionally given brief mention here or there, most often with no substantial
information.

The first, is using certain herbs to induce miscarriage, also called herbal
abortion. **It is not a sure way to terminate pregnancy** , and seems to work
about 40-45% of the time, IF herbs are started early enough. If herbal
abortion is attempted and is not successful it is very important to follow up
with a clinical abortion, as the herbs can cause birth defects and or
complications during pregnancy. Herbs are most commonly used during the time
period when an embryo is developing the foundations for all of the major body
systems, organs in particular. This occurs from developmental weeks 4 through
8, which is the time that herbs are used. This is why, it is so important to
follow up with a clinical abortion if the herbs don't work. The risk of
causing damage is very real. Just because this is something you can do at
home, doesn't make it safe or without risk. There can be negative effects to
you, or to any pregnancy carried to term. Just like they say, just because its
natural doesn't make it safe.

If you choose to utilize the knowledge contained within this website to try
and end a pregnancy at home, please use this knowledge wisely and responsibly.
I strongly believe that the choice whether or not to carry a pregnancy to term
should be a woman's choice, I also think the man should be involved if it is
appropriate. However ultimately, it is the women who raise the children. In
ancient times, children belonged to the woman and her clan, not to the man.
Its not until the patriarchy took over, that monogamous relationships became
enforced, ownership of the woman and the child implemented. Ownership? you
might ask? think about these things... we take the husband's name when we
marry as do the children, for how many years have women been introducing
themselves as Mrs. (insert husband's name here) - its only more recently has
this changed as women reclaim some of their power. If you think on it, you'll
see more ways that we are conditioned and controlled. Now before I go off on a
totally different subject, back to the matters at hand....

The second little known option is called Menstrual Extraction, unfortunately
it is not a very available option, and for most women, finding someone to help
you, is very remote. Menstrual Extraction and the device that is used was
developed in the early 70's by Carol Downer and Lorraine Rothman just before
abortion was legalized with the Supreme Court decision Roe vs. Wade in 1973.
It has multiple purposes, not only can it physically remove a fertilized egg,
menstrual extraction can remove an inconveniently timed period, due to start
right before a romantic weekend. I think it would be great if more midwives,
naturopaths or inspired women took it upon themselves to learn how to do this
and make it more available. However, the technique is likely to fall into the
realm of practicing medicine without a license as it could be construed as an
invasive procedure. It is difficult although not impossible to preform upon
yourself, personally, I would suggest having the help of someone who knows
what they are doing.

Both of these alternative options must be used before the 8th week of
pregnancy (starting from conception - 10 weeks from the Last Menstrual Period
(LMP)). With the herbs, best chances of success are when herbs are started
when menstruation is due until menstruation is two weeks late (4 weeks
pregnant). The later menstruation becomes the less likely there herbs are to
work, there is still always a chance, and if a clinical abortion is planned
anyway, it might be worth a try. However herbal attempts to terminate
pregnancy should not continue into the 8th week because of increased risks of
serious complications, so herbs should be started no later than the 6th week
from conception.

Realistically, once the 5th and 6th week of pregnancy arrives, herbs are not
likely to work, and if a surgical abortion is to be avoided, the next best
alternative would be chemical abortion, the 5th thru 7th week of pregnancy is
the ideal time for this option to be used (7 to 9 weeks LMP). Some herbalists
think that the next best time to try and force a miscarriage is the 6th week
of pregnancy, because this is the week you would normally bleed if you had not
conceived the previous cycle.

So the trick is catching it early, knowing your cycle is the key. If you know
the day(s) your period is due, you will know if its late. The best time to
dislodge the fertilized egg is before or around the time your period is due.

If you know there is a strong possibility you are pregnant, before your
period, like a broken condom during the fertile time. **There are things you
can do toprevent the egg from implanting**. If you are not sure if you are
fertile, please refer to Determining your Risk of Pregnancy. Things like
emergency contraception need to be used as soon as possible.

**The Value of getting a Pregnancy Test done.**

If your period is late and you suspect pregnancy. The first thing to do is to
find out if conception did occur. By the time your period is late, an early
detection pregnancy test will come out positive, if it is negative you can
spare your body from the added stress of worry, and from ingesting strong
herbs. Some pregnancy tests are so sensitive these days they can give you a
positive reading a couple days before menstruation is due. This is a list of
pregnancy test brand names, which ones are the best and which ones to avoid,
it is a bit dated, you may find more current lists elsewhere.

Unsafe sex coupled with a late period can be nerve-wracking. Excess worry can
also delay menstruation. Taking an early detection pregnancy test can take
away the anxiety caused by "What if?" You'll know one way or the other. Though
some women would rater not know. Personally, I think it is more responsible to
take a pregnancy test, because, if you are not pregnant, you should not be
taking doses of herbs meant for dealing with unwanted pregnancy. You certainly
won't be doing yourself any favors. No point in over-medicating if pregnancy
is not the reason for menstrual delay, and there are many reasons why
menstruation can be late besides pregnancy.

It really doesn't matter if your cycle is always clockwork, every cycle is
different, and even if historically your cycle is like clockwork, this is a
new cycle and it might be different this time. Your body has more control over
ovulation than You do.... and if there were factors in your life around the
time of ovulation that caused your body to postphone ovulation then your
period is going to be late. Unless you are one of the few who can actually
feel ovulation occurring, or you chart your basal body temperature, how can
you be positive that you did indeed ovulate when you expected to? This is why
I encourage the use of early detection tests - not to mention that if you
choose to fill out my questionnaire, a confirmed pregnancy gives that much
more credence to the effectiveness of herbally induced miscarriages and builds
to the scientific body of data that I am collecting.

Clinics such as Planned Parenthood offer early detection tests. You can
sometimes get them done for free or cheaper than buying a home pregnancy test.
Although a home pregnancy test will give more privacy. These days there are
pregnancy tests which can give you an accurate answer 10 days after ovulation,
which means before menstruation is due.

At a clinic if the test comes back positive, a counselor may want to talk with
you about what your feelings are and what you want to do, so if you are
considering terminating the pregnancy you may want to choose a clinic that is
pro-choice. The people at the clinics will probably know very little about
herbs, or about menstrual extractions. They will probably tell you such
methods are very dangerous and recommend you get a clinical abortion. They are
right, these things can be dangerous, if you don't know what you are doing, if
you take more than you should, or take something not meant for internal
consumption. Which is why I believe education is the key. Learn as much as
possible about these things, know the risks, what can go wrong, and what to
expect - know what is involved BEFORE starting!! Other women have shared their
experiences in the Sharing our Wisdom section of the website, it can be
helpful to read these too, however be sure to read through the main Preventing
and Ending Pregnancy page first so that you get all the important info and
details first, there's a lot of info in the sharing our wisdom section too,
but just because someone did this or that, doesn't mean they did it the best
way they could have, or what they did will be right for you. So don't focus
your reading in the sharing section, instead focus on the details here in the
main section.

**Commitment is Important when Ending Pregnancy at Home.**

It is also very important to be committed to ending the pregnancy - if you
have any doubts that you can go through with a clinical abortion - then DON'T
use the herbs (or vitamin c) to try and end the pregnancy. These home remedies
are NOT a reliable way to terminate pregnancy. Sometimes clinics offer payment
plans, or some times you can get funding, your local clinic should know what
is available in your area or state. There may also be doctors who do the
Aspiration Procedure, this is a non-surgical type of abortion, its basically
the same as menstrual extraction. If you can't get funding for an abortion,
there is always adoption, or government agencies will often provide assistance
to low income women while pregnant and when the baby is born.

Methods of expelling a fertilized egg from the uterus require knowledge and
dedication. Ending pregnancy is not easy or instant. Bleeding rarely begins
before the 6th day of self-treatment. Herbal abortifacients must be used with
caution, everyone's tolerance for the herbs is a little different. I will
include some herbs and how they have been used. Herbs are most effective
before your period is due. The more time the egg has to take root the harder
it becomes to dislodge it. Herbal abortion becomes dangerous at 8 weeks of
pregnancy (from conception) herbs should never be started past the 6th week of
pregnancy for this reason.

The decision to end a pregnancy is all encompassing, on many different levels,
spiritual, emotional as well as physical. You must be certain that this is the
right choice. Herbs do not work for everyone. If it doesn't work it is very
important to follow up with a clinical abortion, medical abortion or menstrual
extraction (if you can find someone to help you). You must be completely
focused, and clear with your intent. Taking the time to nurture yourself
through the process. I would suggest reading _Self- Ritual for Invoking
Release of Spirit Life in the Womb_ and _Abortion, Vacuum Cleaners & the Power
Within_ which will give you an idea of the amount of energy goes into
successfully terminating a pregnancy with herbs.

You will need to drink teas, take tinctures or capsules at intervals
throughout the day **_and night_**. The idea is to keep a constant level of
herbs circulating through the body, not to poison oneself. It is important to
follow a schedule. Best results are obtained by those who can take the time to
focus on the goal. Seriously consider taking time off work or school to really
focus on releasing the spirit, nurture yourself through this process. It is
very difficult to take your teas in a timely fashion when you are traveling or
have a busy schedule. It's not easy, nor should it be. You are more likely to
be successful if you give yourself that time. Please use this time to tune
into your body, and use this experience as a learning experience and learn how
to avoid this situation in the future. (this site contains info on how to
avoid pregnancy, definitely worth reviewing) and it may be time to adjust and
improve your current method of contraception.

Once the decision is made, there is no going back, make sure its the right
decision for you, if you have any doubts, or reservations, these
visualizations may help you become more clear on what path is right for you.
If the herbs don't work you MUST switch to plan B. Allowing a pregnancy to
continue to term (giving birth) is not a good idea after taking these strong
herbs. Problems could arise, such as complications during pregnancy, or
possible birth defects. Your safety and the safety of the developing embryo is
not guaranteed. The effects are really unknown, if you cannot or will not
terminate the pregnancy, or if there is any chance you may change your mind,
please do not use the herbs or vitamin C to try and end the pregnancy. Its not
fair to experiment on a child you will ultimately give birth to, not to them
or yourself. Be committed to ending the pregnancy if you use the remedies
found here within these pages.

Herbal Emmenagogues  
Herbs to stimulate Menstruation

* * *

Herbal Abortifacients  
Herbs to encourage miscarriage.  
Vitamin C  
To prevent or end pregnancy  
Complementary Activities  
Helpful for those using herbs or vit c,  
and for those who won't got to a clinic.

* * *

Fertility Awareness  
Section | ![Home](graphics/home.gif) | Preventing and  
Ending Pregnancy  
---|---|---  
| ![](graphics/visitbutn.gif) |

This site Copyright 1998 - 2014 by Sister Zeus

* * *

This page was created January of 1998 and was part of my original educational
booklet first printed in 1995

* * *

This page was last updated June 12, 2007

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

