

This website uses cookies. By continuing you are agreeing to our privacy
policy.

__

Skip to main content

  * ![American Lung Association logo](/images/ala-logo-hybrid.png)

  * ABOUT US

  * OUR INITIATIVES
  * LUNG HEALTH & DISEASES
  * SUPPORT & COMMUNITY
  * STOP SMOKING
  * GET INVOLVED
  * DONATE
  * __
  * ![Location](/images/location-icon3.png) -

__

  * ![Facebook icon](/images/facebook-icon-head.png)
  * ![Twitter icon](/images/twitter-icon-head.png)
  * ![Instagram icon](/images/instagram-icon-head.png)
  * ![YouTube icon](/images/youtube-icon-head.png)

  * ABOUT US

    * Mission, Impact & History
    * Local Associations
    * Our Leadership
    * Scientific Advisors
    * Financial Statements
    * Annual Report
    * Media
    * Blog
    * Sponsors & Supporters
    * Careers
    * Contact Us
    * Corporate Ethics Reporting
  * OUR INITIATIVES
    * LUNG FORCE
    * Saved By The Scan
    * Research
    * Healthy Air
    * Tobacco
    * Education & Training
    * In Your Community
  * LUNG HEALTH & DISEASES
    * Lung Disease Lookup
    * How Lungs Work
    * Protecting Your Lungs
    * Warning Signs Of Lung Disease
    * Lung Procedures and Tests
    * Asthma
    * COPD
    * Influenza (Flu)
    * Lung Cancer
    * Pneumonia
    * Pulmonary Fibrosis
  * SUPPORT & COMMUNITY
    * Lung HelpLine
    * Find Local Support
    * Better Breathers Club
    * Corporate Wellness
    * Online Support Communities
    * Freedom From Smoking Community
  * STOP SMOKING
    * Smoking Facts
    * I Want To Quit
    * Help Someone Quit
    * Join Freedom From Smoking
  * GET INVOLVED
    * Events
    * Become An Advocate
    * Volunteer
    * Ways To Give
  * DONATEDONATE
    * One Time Gift
    * Monthly Gift
    * Memorial Gift

![Location](/images/location-icon3.png) Select your location

Select your location to view local American Lung Association information near
you

Enter your zipcode

Zip Code Click to search by zip code

or

Select your state

State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware
District of Columbia Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas
Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi
Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York
North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island
South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington
West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming

![American Lung Association logo](https://www.lung.org/images/ala-logo-

head.png)![American Lung Association logo](https://www.lung.org/images/ala-

logo6.png)![American Lung Association logo](https://www.lung.org/images/ala-

logo-head.png)

### 1-800-LUNGUSA

Submit a Question

Live Chat

![Espanol](https://www.lung.org/images/espanol-icon-new2.png) Español
![Login](https://www.lung.org/images/login-icon-new2.png)Login
![Location](https://www.lung.org/images/location-icon-new2.png) Select your
location

__

![Open nav menu](https://www.lung.org/images/menu-icon2.png)

  * One Time Gift
  * Monthly Gift
  * Memorial Gift
  *   * ABOUT US

  * OUR INITIATIVES
  * LUNG HEALTH & DISEASES
  * SUPPORT & COMMUNITY
  * STOP SMOKING
  * GET INVOLVED
  * Español
  * Login

  * ABOUT US 

  * Mission, Impact & History
  * Local Associations
  * Our Leadership
  * Scientific Advisors
  * Financial Statements
  * Annual Report
  * Media
  * Blog
  * Sponsors & Supporters
  * Careers
  * Contact Us

  * OUR INITIATIVES 

  * LUNG FORCE
  * Saved By The Scan
  * Research
  * Healthy Air
  * Tobacco
  * Education & Training
  * In Your Community

  * LUNG HEALTH & DISEASES 

  * Lung Disease Lookup
  * How Lungs Work
  * Protecting Your Lungs
  * Warning Signs Of Lung Disease
  * Lung Procedures and Tests
  * Asthma
  * COPD
  * Influenza (Flu)
  * Lung Cancer
  * Pneumonia
  * Pulmonary Fibrosis

  * SUPPORT AND COMMUNITY 

  * Lung HelpLine
  * Find Local Support
  * Better Breathers Club
  * Corporate Wellness
  * Online Disease Support Communities
  * Caregiving Support Community
  * Freedom From Smoking Community

  * STOP SMOKING 

  * Smoking Facts
  * I Want To Quit
  * Help Someone Quit
  * Join Freedom From Smoking

  * GET INVOLVED 

  * Events
  * Become An Advocate
  * Volunteer
  * Ways To Give

www.lung.org > Stop Smoking > Smoking Facts

# Marijuana and Lung Health

The American Lung Association is concerned about the health impacts of
marijuana use, especially on lung health. We caution the public against
smoking marijuana because of the risks it poses to the lungs.

Scientists are researching marijuana now, and the American Lung Association
encourages continued research into the effects of marijuana use on lung
health.

## Marijuana

The health effects of marijuana are determined in large part by how it's
consumed. Marijuana is most commonly smoked using pipes, bongs, paper-wrapped
joints, blunts and other devices including those that heat or vaporize
marijuana. Marijuana can also be consumed through dozens of different products
including e-cigarettes, candy, brownies and other baked goods, capsules,
beverages and many more.

While this statement focuses on marijuana and lung health, it's important to
note that there are other health concerns outside the lungs attributed to
marijuana use that are not addressed here, including neurological and
cognitive effects.1,2

Additionally, there are significant public health concerns associated with
pediatric poisonings caused by accidental ingestion of edible marijuana
products.3

## Marijuana Smoke

Smoke is harmful to lung health. Whether from burning wood, tobacco or
marijuana, toxins and carcinogens are released from the combustion of
materials. Smoke from marijuana combustion has been shown to contain many of
the same toxins, irritants and carcinogens as tobacco smoke.4-7

Beyond just what's in the smoke alone, marijuana is typically smoked
differently than tobacco. Marijuana smokers tend to inhale more deeply and
hold their breath longer than cigarette smokers, which leads to a greater
exposure per breath to tar.8

Secondhand marijuana smoke contains many of the same toxins and carcinogens
found in directly-inhaled marijuana smoke, in similar amounts if not more.5
While there is no data on the health consequences of breathing secondhand
marijuana smoke, there is concern that it could cause harmful health effects,
especially among vulnerable children in the home. Additional research on the
health effects of secondhand marijuana smoke is needed.

## Lung Health and Marijuana Smoke

Smoking marijuana clearly damages the human lung. Research shows that smoking
marijuana causes chronic bronchitis and marijuana smoke has been shown to
injure the cell linings of the large airways, which could explain why smoking
marijuana leads to symptoms such as chronic cough, phlegm production, wheeze
and acute bronchitis.4,9

Smoking marijuana has also been linked to cases of air pockets in between both
lungs and between the lungs and the chest wall, as well as large air bubbles
in the lungs among young to middle-aged adults, mostly heavy smokers of
marijuana.

However, it's not possible to establish whether these occur more frequently
among marijuana smokers than the general population.4

Smoking marijuana can harm more than just the lungs and respiratory system--it
can also affect the immune system and the body's ability to fight disease,
especially for those whose immune systems are already weakened from
immunosuppressive drugs or diseases, such as HIV infection.4,9

Smoking marijuana hurts the lungs' first line of defense against infection by
killing cells that help remove dust and germs as well as causing more mucus to
be formed. In addition, it also suppresses the immune system. These effects
could lead to an increased risk of lower respiratory tract infections among
marijuana smokers, although there is no clear evidence of such actual
infections being more common among marijuana smokers.4,9 However, frequent
marijuana-only smokers have more healthcare visits for respiratory conditions
compared to nonsmokers.10

Studies have shown that smoking marijuana may increase the risk of
opportunistic infections among those who are HIV positive, although it does
not seem to affect the development of AIDS or lower white cell counts.4,9

Another potential threat to those with weakened immune systems is Aspergillus,
a mold that can cause lung disorders. It can grow on marijuana, which if then
smoked exposes the lungs to this fungus.4 However, it rarely causes problems
in people with healthy immune systems.

## "Vaping" Marijuana

There is little known on the potential lung health effects of inhaling
marijuana or products made from it through routes other than smoking. However:

  * Use of "vape-pens" to inhale cannabis concentrates or liquids may have similar respiratory health effects as e-cigarette use.
  * "Dabbing" (inhaling flash-vaporized cannabis concentrates) may also cause respiratory problems.

## Medical Marijuana

The American Lung Association encourages continued research into the health
effects of marijuana use, as the benefits, risks and safety of marijuana use
for medical purposes require further study. Patients considering using
marijuana for medicinal purposes should make this decision in consultation
with their doctor, and consider means of administration other than smoking.

## Bottom Line

  * Smoking marijuana clearly damages the human lung, and regular use leads to chronic bronchitis and can cause an immune-compromised person to be more susceptible to lung infections.
  * No one should be exposed to secondhand marijuana smoke.
  * Due to the risks it poses to lung health, the American Lung Association strongly cautions the public against smoking marijuana as well as tobacco products.
  * More research is needed into the effects of marijuana on health, especially lung health.

See our public policy position on marijuana and lung health.

* * *

  * Sources

    1. National Institute on Drug Abuse. DrugFacts: Marijuana
    2. Volkow ND, Baler RD, Compton WM, Weiss SRB. Adverse health effects of marijuana use. _N Engl J Med_. 2014;370(23):2219-27.
    3. Wang GS, Roosevelt G, Heard K. Pediatric marijuana exposures in a medical marijuana state. _JAMA Pediatr_. 2013;167(7):630-3.
    4. Tashkin DP. Effects of marijuana smoking on the lung. _Ann Am Thorac Soc_. 2013;10(3):239-47.
    5. Moir D, Rickert WS, Levasseur G, et al. A comparison of mainstream and sidestream marijuana and tobacco cigarette smoke produced under two machine smoking conditions. _Chem Res Toxicol_. 2008;21(2):494-502. doi:10.1021/tx700275p.
    6. Novotny M, Merli F, Wiesler D, Fencl M, Saeed T. Fractionation and capillary gas chromatographic--mass spectrometric characterization of the neutral components in marijuana and tobacco smoke condensates. _J Chromatogr A_. 1982;238:141-50. doi: 10.1016/S0021-9673(00)82720-X
    7. Hoffmann D, Brunnemann KD, Gori GB, Wynder EL. On the Carcinogenicity of Marijuana Smoke. In: Runeckles VC, ed. Recent Advances in Phytochemistry. Springer US; 1975:63-81.
    8. Wu T-C, Tashkin DP, Djahed B, Rose JE. Pulmonary hazards of smoking marijuana as compared with tobacco. _N Engl J Med_. 1988;318(6):347-51.
    9. Howden ML, Naughton MT. Pulmonary effects of marijuana inhalation. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2011;5(1):87-92.
    10. Polen MR, Sidney S, Tekawa IS, Sadler M, Friedman GD. Health care use by frequent marijuana smokers who do not smoke tobacco. _West J Med_. 1993;158(6):596-601.

#####

* * *

### News & Events

  * News: Obama Administration Delays Necessary Tobacco Cessation Coverage Clarification 
  * News: 2016 National Youth Tobacco Survey Results Show Progress, Continued Efforts Needed by Federal Government to Fight Tobacco Use
  * Blog: The Best Way to Celebrate Your Father this Father's Day
  * Blog: Asthma and Climate Change: What You Need to Know

_Page Last Updated: March 26, 2019_

Blank Section Header

  * Smoking Facts
    * Health Effects
    * What's In a Cigarette?
    * Impact of Tobacco Use
    * Kids and Smoking
  * I Want to Quit
    * Reasons to Quit Smoking
    * Benefits of Quitting
    * How to Quit Smoking
    * What to Expect
    * Quit Smoking Questions and Answers
  * Help Someone Quit
    * How Do You Begin?
    * Being There for the Long Run
    * Meeting Challenges along the Way
    * Reaching Out to a Friend Who Smokes
  * Join Freedom From Smoking
    * About Freedom From Smoking
    * Success Stories
    * Become a Facilitator
    * Freedom From Smoking Clinics

![](/images/ads/clear-ad-1x1px.png)

![Red button with telephone](/images/ctafooter-ask-expert.png)

Ask An Expert

Questions about your lung health? Need help finding healthcare? Call
1-800-LUNGUSA.

Get help

![Red button of two hand prints](/images/ctafooter-we-need.png)

We need your generous support

Make a difference by delivering research, education and advocacy to those
impacted by lung disease.

Donate now

![Button of turquoise LUNG FORCE swirl](/images/ctafooter-join-force.png)

What is LUNG FORCE?

LUNG FORCE unites women and their loved ones across the country to stand
together in the fight against lung cancer.

Get involved

  * ![Facebook icon](/images/facebook-icon-footer.png)
  * ![Twitter icon](/images/twitter-icon-footer.png)
  * ![Instagram icon](/images/instagram-icon-footer.png)
  * ![YouTube icon](/images/youtube-icon-footer.png)

Sign up for the latest news about lung health and healthy air

  * LUNG HEALTH INFORMATION
    * Lung Disease List
    * Warning Signs of Lung Disease
    * Lung Disease Data & Statistics
    * Lung Procedures, Tests & Treatments
    * Lung Cancer Facts
    * Smoking Facts
    * Radon Facts
  * PROGRAMS & SERVICES
    * Lung HelpLine
    * Freedom From Smoking
    * Better Breathers Clubs
    * Asthma Basics
    * LUNG FORCE Expos
    * Online Support Communities
  * FUNDRAISERS
    * Fight For Air Climb
    * LUNG FORCE Walks
    * Cycling Events
    * Donate a Car
    * Memorial & Honor Gifts
    * Planned Giving
    * Christmas Seals
  * ABOUT THE LUNG ASSOCIATION
    * Contact Us
    * Local Associations
    * Careers
    * Lung Action Network
    * Sign Up for Email
    * Volunteers
    * Annual Report
    * Policies
  * SIGNATURE REPORTS
    * State of the Air
    * State of Lung Cancer
    * State of Tobacco Control
    * Lung Health Barometer

![American Lung Association logo](https://www.lung.org/images/ala-logo-

dark3.png)![American Lung Association logo](https://www.lung.org/images/ala-

logo-dark3.png) (C) American Lung Association | 1-800-LUNGUSA
(1-800-586-4872)1-800-LUNGUSA | Submit A Question

| Live Chat

| Contact

Media | Blog | Member Center | RSS | Terms Of Use | Privacy Policy | Sitemap

Our Family Of Sites ![Fight for Air Climb](https://www.lung.org/images/fight-

for-air-climb-logo2.png) ![Freedom From

Smoking](https://www.lung.org/images/freedom-from-smoking-logo2.png) ![Lung

Force](https://www.lung.org/images/lung-force-logo2.png) ![Lung Helpline and

Tobacco Quitline](https://www.lung.org/images/lung-helpline-and-tobacco-

quitline-logo2.png) ![Saved By The Scan](https://www.lung.org/images/our-

initiatives/saved-by-the-scan/logo-sbts.png)

![Powered by Blackbaud](/assets/poweredby.gif)  
nonprofit software

__

Join the fight for healthy lungs and healthy air.

Donate Now.

![](https://googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/1063344903/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel

