

# Long-term effects of cannabis

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/f/f2/Edit-clear.svg/40px-Edit-

clear.svg.png)

|

This article's **lead section may not adequately summarize its contents**.
Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. To comply with Wikipedia's
lead section guidelines, please consider modifying the lead to provide an
accessible overview of the article's key points in such a way that it can
stand on its own as a concise version of the article. _( December 2013)_

\---|---  
Part of a series on  
\---  
Cannabis  
![Cannabis](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a8/Cannabis_leaf.svg/120px-

Cannabis_leaf.svg.png)

  * Arts
  * Culture

  * 420

  * Magu (deity)
  * Names
  * Religion
    * Judaism
    * Latter-day Saints
    * Sikhism
  * Stoner film
  * Stoner rock
  * Terms

Chemistry

  * **Cannabinoid receptors**
  * Cannabinoid receptor type 1
  * Cannabinoid receptor type 2

  * **Cannabinoids**

  * 2-AG

  * 2-AGE, Noladin ether
  * AEA
  * CBC
  * CBL
  * CBD
  * CBDV
  * CBG
  * CBN
  * CBV
  * NADA
  * THC
  * THCV
  * Virodhamine
  * **Synthetic cannabinoids**

  * AM-2201

  * CP-55940
  * Dimethylheptylpyran
  * HU-210
  * HU-331
  * JWH-018
  * JWH-073
  * JWH-133
  * Levonantradol
  * SR144528
  * WIN 55,212-2

Consumption

  * Edibles
  * Smoking
  * Tea

Economics

  * Coffeeshop
  * Cultivation
  * Shop
  * Social Club
  * Grow house
  * Grow shop
  * Head shop
  * Marijuana vending machine

Effects

  * Dependence
  * Drug testing
  * Effects of legalized cannabis
  * Gateway drug theory
  * Long term effects
  * Medicine
  * Memory
  * Pregnancy
  * Psychosis
  * Time perception

Forms

  * Bhang
  * Blunt
  * Charas
  * Flower essential oil
  * Hash oil
  * Hashish
  * Hemp
  * Hemp oil
  * Joint
  * Kief
  * Roach
  * Synthetic cannabis
  * Thai stick
  * Tincture

Law

  * Cannabis rights

  * Legality of cannabis

  * Timeline of cannabis law

  * Legality of cannabis in US

  * Legal history of cannabis in US

  * US (Medical

  * Non-medical
  * Timeline)

  * Cannabis Act of Canada

  * Legal history of cannabis in Canada

  * Drug policy of California

  * Drug policy of the Netherlands

  * Drug policy of Portugal

Regional

  * Adult lifetime cannabis use by country
  * Annual cannabis use by country
  * Afghanistan
  * Alabama
  * American Samoa
  * Arkansas
  * Australia
  * California
  * Canada
  * Chile
  * Colorado
  * Egypt
  * Georgia (USA)
  * Guam
  * Idaho
  * India
  * Indiana
  * Iowa
  * Jamaica
  * Kansas
  * Kentucky
  * Louisiana
  * Maine
  * Massachusetts
  * Montana
  * Morocco
  * Nebraska
  * New Zealand
  * Nigeria
  * North Dakota
  * North Mariana Islands
  * Oregon
  * Palau
  * Papua New Guinea
  * Paraguay
  * Portugal
  * South Dakota
  * Svalbard
  * Switzerland
  * Tennessee
  * U.K.
  * U.S.
  * Uruguay
  * Utah
  * Vermont
  * Virginia
  * Virginia
  * Wisconsin
  * Wyoming
  * American Indian reservations

Variants

  * Autoflowering cannabis

  * **Cannabis genus**

  * Cannabis indica

  * Cannabis ruderalis
  * Cannabis sativa

  * **Cannabis strains**

  * Acapulco Gold

  * Blue Dream
  * Charlotte's web
  * Kush
  * Malawi Gold
  * Sour Diesel

Related

  * Drug culture
  * Illegal drug trade
  * Psychedelia

  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/44/Cannabis_leaf_2.svg/15px-Cannabis_leaf_2.svg.png) Cannabis portal

  * ![Esculaap4.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/66/Esculaap4.svg/15px-Esculaap4.svg.png) Medicine portal
  * ![Veranotrigo.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4f/Veranotrigo.jpg/15px-Veranotrigo.jpg) Agriculture portal

  * v

  * t
  * e

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/34/Trichomes.jpg/220px-

Trichomes.jpg)

_Cannabis_ flower with visible trichomes

The **long-termeffects of cannabis** have been the subject of ongoing debate.
Because cannabis is illegal in most countries, research presents a challenge;
as such, there remains much to be concluded.[1]

## Contents

  * 1 Memory and intelligence
  * 2 Dependency
  * 3 Mental health
    * 3.1 Acute psychosis
    * 3.2 Anxiety
    * 3.3 Depersonalization/derealization symptoms
    * 3.4 Chronic psychosis
    * 3.4.1 Schizophrenia
    * 3.5 Depressive disorder
    * 3.6 Mania symptoms
    * 3.7 Suicidal behaviour
  * 4 Gateway drug hypothesis
  * 5 Physical health
    * 5.1 Brain
    * 5.2 Heart and circulation
    * 5.3 Cancer
    * 5.3.1 Lung
    * 5.3.2 Head and neck
    * 5.4 Respiratory effects
    * 5.5 Reproductive and endocrine effects
    * 5.6 Mortality
  * 6 See also
  * 7 References

## Memory and intelligence[edit]

Acute cannabis intoxication has been shown to negatively affect attention,
psychomotor task ability, and short-term memory.[2][3] Studies of chronic
cannabis use have not consistently demonstrated a long-lasting or refractory
effect on the attention span, memory function, or cognitive abilities of
moderate-dose long-term users. Once cannabis use was discontinued, these
effects disappeared in users abstinent for a period of several months.[4]

Chronic use of cannabis during adolescence, a time when the brain is still
developing, is correlated in the long term with lower IQ and cognitive
deficits. It is not clear, though, if cannabis use causes the problems or if
the causality is in the reverse. Recent studies have shown that IQ deficits
existed in subjects before chronic cannabis use, suggesting that lower IQ may
instead be a risk factor for cannabis addiction.[5]

## Dependency[edit]

Main article: Cannabis use disorder

Cannabis is the most widely used illicit drug in the Western world,[6] and
although in the United States 10 to 20% of consumers who use cannabis daily
become dependent, it is different from addiction.[7] Cannabis use disorder is
defined in the fifth revision of the _Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders_ (DSM-5) as a condition requiring treatment.[6] A 2012 review
of cannabis use and dependency in the United States by Danovitch _et al_ said
that "42% of persons over age 12 have used cannabis at least once in their
lifetime, 11.5% have used within the past year, and 1.8% have met diagnostic
criteria for cannabis abuse or dependence within the past year. Among
individuals who have ever used cannabis, conditional dependence (the
proportion who go on to develop dependence) is 9%." Although no medication is
known to be effective in combating dependency, combinations of psychotherapy
such as cognitive behavioural therapy and motivational enhancement therapy
have achieved some success.[8]

Cannabis dependence develops in 9% of users, significantly less than that of
heroin, cocaine, alcohol, and prescribed anxiolytics,[9] but slightly higher
than that for psilocybin, mescaline, or LSD. Dependence on cannabis tends to
be less severe than that observed with cocaine, opiates, and alcohol.[10] A
2018 review of the nature of dependency on marijuana states that the risk of
dependence formation among regular marijuana consumers has declined since
2002.[11][12]

## Mental health[edit]

Historically, the possible connection between psychosis and cannabis has been
seen as controversial.[13] Medical evidence strongly suggests that the long-
term use of cannabis by people who begin use at an early age display a higher
tendency towards mental health problems and other physical and development
disorders, although a causal link is not established.[14] These risks appear
to be most acute in adolescent users.[14]

Cannabis can contain over 100 different cannabinoid compounds, many of which
have displayed psychoactive effects. The most distinguished cannabinoids are
∆9 – THC (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD), with THC being the primary agent
responsible for the psychoactivity of cannabis.[15][16] The effects of THC and
CBD are salient regarding psychosis and anxiety.[17]

### Acute psychosis[edit]

As of 2017 there is clear evidence that long term use of cannabis increases
the risk of psychosis, regardless of confounding factors, and particularly for
people who have genetic risk factors.[18]

### Anxiety[edit]

Numerous studies have been conducted regarding anxiety and cannabis for
therapeutic purposes, and these cross-sectional studies have been mostly
consistent regarding the anxiolytic effects. The studies showed relief of
anxiety as a result of cannabis consumption.[19]

### Depersonalization/derealization symptoms[edit]

Cannabis use may precipitate new-onset panic attacks and
depersonalization/derealization symptoms simultaneously. However, individuals
experiencing depersonalisation/derealisation symptoms prior to any cannabis
use have reported the effects of cannabis to calm these symptoms and make the
depersonalisation/derealisation disorder more manageable with regular use.[20]

### Chronic psychosis[edit]

According to one 2013 review, long term cannabis use "increases the risk of
psychosis in people with certain genetic or environmental vulnerabilities",
but does not cause psychosis. Important predisposing factors include genetic
liability, childhood trauma and urban upbringing.[13] Another 2013 review
concluded that cannabis use may cause permanent psychological disorders in
some users such as cognitive impairment, anxiety, paranoia, and increased
risks of psychosis. Key predisposing variables include age of first exposure,
frequency of use, the potency of the cannabis used, and individual
susceptibility.[21] A 2013 review stated that there exists "a strong
association between schizophrenia and cannabis use...". The authors found that
cannabis use alone does not predict the transition to subsequent psychiatric
illness. Many factors are involved, including genetics, environment, time
period of initiation and duration of cannabis use, underlying psychiatric
pathology that preceded drug use, and combined use of other psychoactive
drugs.[22]

A 2014 review said that "[b]ecause longitudinal work indicates that cannabis
use precedes psychotic symptoms, it seems reasonable to assume a causal
relationship" between cannabis and psychosis, but that "more work is needed to
address the possibility of gene-environment correlation."[23] In the same
year, a review examined psychological therapy as add-on for people with
schizophrenia who are using cannabis:

Cannabis reduction: adjunct psychological therapy versus treatment as
usual[24] Summary

* * *

Results are limited and inconclusive because of the small number and size of
randomized controlled trials available and quality of data reporting within
these trials. More research is needed to explore the effects of adjunct
psychological therapy that is specifically about cannabis and psychosis as
currently there is no evidence for any novel intervention being better than
standard treatment, for those that both use cannabis and have
schizophrenia.[24]  
| Outcome | Findings in words | Findings in numbers | Quality of evidence  
\---|---|---|---  
Behavior  
Frequency of cannabis use  
(group-based therapy)  
Follow up: 1 year | People in the intervention groups scored a little lower
compared to people receiving treatment as usual but there was no clear
difference between the therapy groups and standard care. This finding is based
on data of moderate quality. | MD 0.1 lower (2.44 lower to 2.24 higher) _|
Moderate  
Mental state  
Average score (PANSS) - positive symptoms  
Follow up: 12 months | On average, people receiving cannabis reduction therapy
scored lower than people treated with treatment as usual but there was no
clear difference between groups. This finding is based on data of moderate
quality. | MD 0.3 lower (2.55 lower to 1.95 higher)_ | Moderate  
Quality of life  
Average score (WHO QOL questionnaire)  
Follow up: 1 years | On average, people receiving cannabis reduction therapy
scored higher compared to people in the control group receiving treatment as
usual. There was, however, no clear difference between the groups and these
findings are based on data of moderate quality. | MD 0.9 higher (1.15 lower to
2.95 higher)* | Moderate  
| No study reported any data on outcomes such as relapse, adverse effects,
leaving the study early and information relating to satisfaction with
treatment | |  
| * At present the meaning of these scores in day-to-day care is unclear. | |

A 2016 meta-analysis found that cannabis use increases the risk of psychosis,
and that a dose–response relationship exists between the level of cannabis use
and risk of psychosis. The analysis was not able to establish a causal
link.[25] Another 2016 meta-analysis found that cannabis use only predicted
transition to psychosis among those who met the criteria for abuse of or
dependence on the drug.[26]

A 2016 review found that the epidemiologic evidence regarding cannabis use and
psychosis was strong enough "to warrant a public health message that cannabis
use can increase the risk of psychotic disorders," but also cautioned that
additional studies are needed to determine the size of the effect.[27] A 2016
review said that the existing evidence did not show that cannabis caused
psychosis, but rather that early or heavy cannabis use were among many factors
more likely to be found in those at risk of developing psychosis.[28]

#### Schizophrenia[edit]

There is substantial evidence of a statistical association between cannabis
use and the development of schizophrenia or other psychoses, with the highest
risk among the most frequent users.[29]

Use of cannabis in adolescence or earlier is correlated with developing
schizoaffective disorder in adult life, although the proportion of these cases
is small. Susceptibility is most often found in users with at least one copy
of the polymorphic COMT gene.[30]

Cannabis with a high THC to CBD ratio produces a higher incidence of
psychological effects. CBD may show antipsychotic and neuroprotective
properties, acting as an antagonist to some of the effects of THC. Studies
examining this effect have used high ratios of CBD to THC, and it is unclear
to what extent these laboratory studies translate to the types of cannabis
used by real life users.[21][31] Research has shown that CBD can safely
prevent psychosis in general.[32]

### Depressive disorder[edit]

Less attention has been given to the association between cannabis use and
depression, though according to the Australian National Drug & Alcohol
Research Center, it is possible this is because cannabis users who have
depression are less likely to access treatment than those with psychosis.[33]
A 2017 review suggest that cannabis has been shown to improve the mood of
depression-diagnosed patients.[12]

Teenage cannabis users show no difference from the general population in
incidence of major depressive disorder (MDD), but an association exists
between early exposure coupled with continued use into adult life and
increased incidence of MDD in adulthood.[30] Among cannabis users of all ages,
there may be an increased risk of developing depression, with heavy users
seemingly having a higher risk.[34]

A February 2019 systematic review and meta-analysis found that cannabis
consumption during adolescence was associated with an increased risk of
developing depression and suicidal behavior later in life, while finding no
effect on anxiety.[35]

### Mania symptoms[edit]

Among those who have been previously diagnosed with bipolar disorder, cannabis
may worsen the occurrence of manic symptoms.[36]

### Suicidal behaviour[edit]

Adolescent cannabis users show no difference from their peers in suicidal
ideation or rate of suicide attempts, but those who continue to use cannabis
into adult life exhibit an increased incidence of both, although multiple
other contributory factors are also implicated.[30]

In the general population a weak (indirect) association appears to exist
between suicidal behaviour and cannabis consumption in both psychotic and non-
psychotic users,[37] although it remains unclear whether regular cannabis use
increases the risk of suicide.[38] Cannabis use is a risk factor in
suicidality, but suicide attempts are characterized by many additional risk
factors including mood disorders, alcohol use, stress, personal problems and
poor support.[37]

## Gateway drug hypothesis[edit]

Main article: Gateway drug theory § Cannabis

The gateway drug hypothesis asserts that the use of soft drugs such as
cannabis, tobacco or alcohol may ultimately lead to the use of harder drugs.
Whether the role of cannabis in other drug use is causative or simply the
result of the same influencing factors of drug use in general is debated.

Large-scale longitudinal studies in the UK and New Zealand from 2015 and 2017
showed an association between cannabis use and an increased probability of
later disorders in the use of other drugs.[39][40][41]

## Physical health[edit]

A 2013 literature review said that exposure to cannabis was "associated with
diseases of the liver (particularly with co-existing hepatitis C), lungs,
heart, and vasculature". The authors cautioned that "evidence is needed, and
further research should be considered, to prove causal associations of
marijuana with many physical health conditions".[6]

### Brain[edit]

Imaging studies suggest that long-term exposure does not lead to decreases in
white matter or grey matter volume, but may lead to reductions in hippocampal
volume. Variations in the methodologies used lend some uncertainty to this
conclusion.[42]

### Heart and circulation[edit]

The acute effects of cannabis use in humans include a dose-dependent increase
in heart rate, typically accompanied by a mild increase in blood pressure
while lying down and postural hypotension - a drop in blood pressure when
standing up. These effects may vary depending on the relative concentration of
the many different cannabinoids that can affect the cardiovascular function,
such as cannabigerol. Smoking cannabis decreases exercise tolerance.[43]
Cardiovascular effects may not lead to serious health issues for the majority
of young, healthy users; on the contrary, heart attack, that is myocardial
infarction, stroke, and other adverse cardiovascular events, have occurred in
association with its use. Cannabis use by people with cardiovascular disease
poses a health risk because it can lead to increased cardiac work, increased
catecholamine levels, and impaired blood oxygen carrying capacity due to the
production of carboxyhemoglobin.[44]

### Cancer[edit]

A 2012 review examining the relation of cancer and cannabis found little
direct evidence that cannabinoids found in cannabis, including THC, are
carcinogenic. Cannabinoids are not mutagenic according to the Ames test.
However, cannabis _smoke_ has been found to be carcinogenic in rodents and
mutagenic in the Ames test. Correlating cannabis use with the development of
human cancers has been problematic due to difficulties in quantifying cannabis
use, unmeasured confounders, and that cannabinoids may have anti-cancer
effects.[45]

According to a 2013 literature review, cannabis could be carcinogenic, but
there are methodological limitations in studies making it difficult to
establish a link between cannabis use and cancer risk.[6] The authors say that
bladder cancer does seem to be linked to habitual cannabis use, and that there
may be a risk for cancers of the head and neck among long-term (more than 20
years) users.[6] Gordon and colleagues said, "there does appear to be an
increased risk of cancer (particularly head and neck, lung, and bladder
cancer) for those who use marijuana over a period of time, although what
length of time that this risk increases is uncertain."[6]

#### Lung[edit]

There have been a limited number of studies that have looked at the effects of
smoking cannabis on the respiratory system.[46] Chronic heavy cannabis smoking
is associated with coughing, production of sputum, wheezing, and other
symptoms of chronic bronchitis.[47] Regular cannabis use has not been shown to
cause significant abnormalities in lung function.[48]

Regular cannabis smokers show pathological changes in lung cells similar to
those that precede the development of lung cancer in tobacco smokers.[49]
Gordon and colleagues in a 2013 literature review said: "Unfortunately,
methodological limitations in many of the reviewed studies, including
selection bias, small sample size, limited generalizability, and lack of
adjustment for tobacco smoking, may limit the ability to attribute cancer risk
solely to marijuana use."[6] Reviewing studies adjusted for age and tobacco
use, they said there was a risk of lung cancer even after adjusting for
tobacco use, but that the period of time over which the risk increases is
uncertain.[6]

A 2013 review which specifically examined the effects of cannabis on the lung
concluded "[f]indings from a limited number of well-designed epidemiological
studies do not suggest an increased risk for the development of either lung or
upper airway cancer from light or moderate use, although evidence is mixed
concerning possible carcinogenic risks of heavy, long-term use."[48]

In 2013 the International Lung Cancer Consortium found no significant
additional lung cancer risk in tobacco users who also smoked cannabis. Nor did
they find an increased risk in cannabis smokers who did not use tobacco. They
concluded that "[o]ur pooled results showed no significant association between
the intensity, duration, or cumulative consumption of cannabis smoke and the
risk of lung cancer overall or in never smokers." They cautioned that "[o]ur
results cannot preclude the possibility that cannabis may exhibit an
association with lung cancer risk at extremely high dosage."[50]

Cannabis smoke contains thousands of organic and inorganic chemicals,
including many of the same carcinogens as tobacco smoke.[51] A 2012 special
report by the British Lung Foundation concluded that cannabis smoking was
linked to many adverse effects, including bronchitis and lung cancer.[52] They
identified cannabis smoke as a carcinogen and also said awareness of the
danger was low compared with the high awareness of the dangers of smoking
tobacco particularly among younger users. They said there was an increased
risk from each cannabis cigarette due to drawing in large puffs of smoke and
holding them.[52] Cannabis smoke has been listed on the California Proposition
65 warning list as a carcinogen since 2009, but leaves and pure THC are
not.[53]

#### Head and neck[edit]

A 2011 review of studies in the United States found that although some
supported the hypothesis that cannabis use increased the risk of getting head
and neck cancer, when other factors are accounted for the majority did
not.[45] Gordon and colleagues (2013) said there was a risk of these cancers
associated with cannabis use over a long period of time.[6] A 2015 review
found no association with lifetime cannabis use and the development of head
and neck cancer.[54]

### Respiratory effects[edit]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/5f/Cannabissativadior.jpg/170px-

Cannabissativadior.jpg)

_Cannabis sativa_ from Vienna Dioscurides, 512 AD

A 2013 literature review by Gordon and colleagues concluded that inhaled
cannabis is associated with lung disease,[6] although Tashkin's 2013 review
has found "no clear link to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease".[48]

Of the various methods of cannabis consumption, smoking is considered the most
harmful; the inhalation of smoke from organic materials can cause various
health problems (e.g., coughing and sputum). Isoprenes help to modulate and
slow down reaction rates, contributing to the significantly differing
qualities of partial combustion products from various sources.[55][56]

Smoking cannabis has been linked to adverse respiratory effects including:
chronic coughing, wheezing, sputum production, and acute bronchitis.[52] It
has been suggested that the common practice of inhaling cannabis smoke deeply
and holding breath could lead to pneumothorax. In a few case reports involving
immunocompromised patients, pulmonary infections such as aspergillosis have
been attributed to smoking cannabis contaminated with fungi. The transmission
of tuberculosis has been linked to cannabis inhalation techniques, such as
sharing water pipes and 'Hotboxing'.[57]

### Reproductive and endocrine effects[edit]

Main article: Cannabis in pregnancy

A study released by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine cited significant evidence for a statistical link between mothers who
smoke cannabis during pregnancy and lower birth weights of their babies.[29]
Cannabis consumption in pregnancy is associated with restrictions in growth of
the fetus, miscarriage, and cognitive deficits in offspring.[58] Although the
majority of research has concentrated on the adverse effects of alcohol, there
is now evidence that prenatal exposure to cannabis has serious effects on the
developing brain and is associated with "deficits in language, attention,
areas of cognitive performance, and delinquent behavior in adolescence".[59] A
report prepared for the Australian National Council on Drugs concluded
cannabis and other cannabinoids are contraindicated in pregnancy as it may
interact with the endocannabinoid system.[33]

### Mortality[edit]

No fatal overdoses associated with cannabis use have ever been reported.[38]
Due to the small number of studies that have been conducted, the evidence is
insufficient to show a long-term elevated risk of mortality from any cause.
Motor vehicle accidents, suicide, and possible respiratory and brain cancers
are all of interest to many researchers, but no studies have been able to show
a consistent increase in mortality from these causes.[38]

## See also[edit]

  * Medical cannabis
  * Effects of cannabis
  * Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome

## References[edit]

  1. **^** "Medical Marijuana Policy in the United States". Stanford.edu. 2012-05-15. Retrieved 2013-01-15.
  2. **^** Andrade, C (May 2016). "Cannabis and neuropsychiatry, 1: benefits and risks". _The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry_. **77** (5): e551–4. doi:10.4088/JCP.16f10841. PMID 27249079.
  3. **^** Sagie S, Eliasi Y, Livneh I, Bart Y, Monovich E (2013). "[Short-and long-term effects of cannabinoids on memory, cognition and mental illness]". _Harefuah_ (Review) (in Hebrew). **152** (12): 737–41, 751. PMID 24483000.
  4. **^** Schoeler, T; Bhattacharyya, S (2013). "The effect of cannabis use on memory function: an update". _Substance Abuse and Rehabilitation_. **4** : 11–27. doi:10.2147/SAR.S25869. PMC 3931635. PMID 24648785.
  5. **^** Zehra A, Burns J, Liu CK, Manza P, Wiers CE, Volkow ND, et al. (2018). "Cannabis Addiction and the Brain: a Review". _J Neuroimmune Pharmacol_. **13** (4): 438–452. doi:10.1007/s11481-018-9782-9. PMC 6223748. PMID 29556883.
  6. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ _**e**_ _**f**_ _**g**_ _**h**_ _**i**_ _**j**_ Gordon AJ, Conley JW, Gordon JM (December 2013). "Medical consequences of marijuana use: a review of current literature". _Curr Psychiatry Rep_ (Review). **15** (12): 419. doi:10.1007/s11920-013-0419-7. PMID 24234874.
  7. **^** Borgelt LM, Franson KL, Nussbaum AM, Wang GS (February 2013). "The pharmacologic and clinical effects of medical cannabis". _Pharmacotherapy_ (Review). **33** (2): 195–209. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1017.1935. doi:10.1002/phar.1187. PMID 23386598.
  8. **^** Danovitch I, Gorelick DA (June 2012). "State of the art treatments for cannabis dependence". _Psychiatr. Clin. North Am._ (Review). **35** (2): 309–26. doi:10.1016/j.psc.2012.03.003. PMC 3371269. PMID 22640758.
  9. **^** Wilkie G, Sakr B, Rizack T (March 2016). "Medical Marijuana Use in Oncology: A Review". _JAMA Oncology_. **2** (5): 670. doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2016.0155. PMID 26986677.
  10. **^** Budney AJ, Roffman R, Stephens RS, Walker D (December 2007). "Marijuana dependence and its treatment". _Addict Sci Clin Pract_ (Review). **4** (1): 4–16. doi:10.1151/ASCP07414. PMC 2797098. PMID 18292704.
  11. **^** Davenport, Steven (2018-10-01). "Falling rates of marijuana dependence among heavy users". _Drug and Alcohol Dependence_. **191** : 52–55. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2018.06.025. ISSN 0376-8716. PMID 30077891.
  12. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Walsh, Z; Gonzalez, R; Crosby, K; S Thiessen, M; Carroll, C; Bonn-Miller, MO (February 2017). "Medical cannabis and mental health: A guided systematic review". _Clinical Psychology Review_. **51** : 15–29. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2016.10.002. PMID 27816801.
  13. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Parakh P, Basu D (2013). "Cannabis and psychosis: have we found the missing links?". _Asian J Psychiatr_ (Review). **6** (4): 281–7. doi:10.1016/j.ajp.2013.03.012. PMID 23810133.
  14. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Hoch E, Bonnetn U, Thomasius R, Ganzer F, Havemann-Reinecke U, Preuss UW (2015). "Risks associated with the non-medicinal use of cannabis". _Dtsch Arztebl Int_ (Review). **112** (16): 271–8. doi:10.3238/arztebl.2015.0271. PMC 4442549. PMID 25939318.
  15. **^** Schier, Alexandre Rafael de Mello; Ribeiro, Natalia Pinho de Oliveira; e Silva, Adriana Cardoso de Oliveira; Hallak, Jaime Eduardo Cecilio; Crippa, José Alexandre S.; Nardi, Antonio E.; Zuardi, Antonio Waldo (June 2012). "Cannabidiol, a Cannabis sativa constituent, as an anxiolytic drug". _Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria_. **34** : S104–S117. doi:10.1590/s1516-44462012000500008. ISSN 1516-4446.
  16. **^** Walsh, Zach; Gonzalez, Raul; Crosby, Kim; S. Thiessen, Michelle; Carroll, Chris; Bonn-Miller, Marcel O. (2017-02-01). "Medical cannabis and mental health: A guided systematic review". _Clinical Psychology Review_. **51** : 15–29. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2016.10.002. ISSN 0272-7358. PMID 27816801.
  17. **^** Crippa, José Alexandre; Zuardi, Antonio Waldo; Martín-Santos, Rocio; Bhattacharyya, Sagnik; Atakan, Zerrin; McGuire, Philip; Fusar-Poli, Paolo (October 2009). "Cannabis and anxiety: a critical review of the evidence". _Human Psychopharmacology: Clinical and Experimental_. **24** (7): 515–523. doi:10.1002/hup.1048. ISSN 0885-6222.
  18. **^** Steenkamp, MM; Blessing, EM; Galatzer-Levy, IR; Hollahan, LC; Anderson, WT (March 2017). "Marijuana and other cannabinoids as a treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder: A literature review". _Depression and Anxiety_. **34** (3): 207–216. doi:10.1002/da.22596. PMID 28245077.
  19. **^** Bonn-Miller, Marcel O.; Babson, Kimberly A.; Vandrey, Ryan (March 2014). "Using cannabis to help you sleep: Heightened frequency of medical cannabis use among those with PTSD". _Drug and Alcohol Dependence_. **136** : 162–165. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.12.008. ISSN 0376-8716. PMC 3929256. PMID 24412475.
  20. **^** _Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-5._ (Fifth edition. ed.). American Psychiatric Association. 2013. p. 304.
  21. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Niesink, RJ; van Laar, MW (2013). "Does Cannabidiol Protect Against Adverse Psychological Effects of THC?". _Frontiers in Psychiatry_ (Review). **4** : 130. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00130. PMC 3797438. PMID 24137134.
  22. **^** Chadwick, B.; Miller, M. L.; Hurd, Y. L. (2013). "Cannabis Use during Adolescent Development: Susceptibility to Psychiatric Illness". _Frontiers in Psychiatry_. **4** : 129. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00129. PMC 3796318. PMID 24133461.
  23. **^** van Winkel, Ruud; Kuepper, Rebecca (28 March 2014). "Epidemiological, Neurobiological, and Genetic Clues to the Mechanisms Linking Cannabis Use to Risk for Nonaffective Psychosis". _Annual Review of Clinical Psychology_. **10** (1): 767–791. doi:10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-032813-153631. PMID 24471373.
  24. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ McLoughlin, B; Pushpa-Rajah, J; Gillies, D (2014). "Cannabis and schizophrenia". _Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews_. **10** (2): 336–337. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004837.pub3. PMC 4332954. PMID 25552590.
  25. **^** Marconi, A; Di Forti, M; Lewis, CM; Murray, RM; Vassos, E (15 February 2016). "Meta-analysis of the Association Between the Level of Cannabis Use and Risk of Psychosis". _Schizophrenia Bulletin_. **42** (5): 1262–1269. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbw003. PMC 4988731. PMID 26884547.
  26. **^** Kraan, T; Velthorst, E; Koenders, L; Zwaart, K; Ising, HK; van den Berg, D; de Haan, L; van der Gaag, M (March 2016). "Cannabis use and transition to psychosis in individuals at ultra-high risk: review and meta-analysis". _Psychological Medicine_. **46** (4): 673–81. doi:10.1017/S0033291715002329. PMID 26568030.
  27. **^** Gage, SH; Hickman, M; Zammit, S (1 April 2016). "Association Between Cannabis and Psychosis: Epidemiologic Evidence". _Biological Psychiatry_. **79** (7): 549–56. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.08.001. PMID 26386480.
  28. **^** Ksir C, Hart CL (2016). "Cannabis and Psychosis: a Critical Overview of the Relationship". _Curr Psychiatry Rep_ (Review). **18** (2): 12. doi:10.1007/s11920-015-0657-y. PMID 26781550. " our review of the evidence leads us to conclude that both early use of cannabis and heavy use of cannabis are more likely in individuals with a vulnerability to a variety of other problem behaviors, such as early or heavy use of cigarettes or alcohol, use of other illicit drugs, and poor school performance."
  29. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "The Health Effects of Cannabis and Cannabinoids: The Current State of Evidence and Recommendations for Research : Health and Medicine Division". _nationalacademies.org_. Retrieved 2017-02-19.
  30. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Chadwick, Benjamin; Miller, Michael L; Hurd, Yasmin L (2013). "Cannabis Use during Adolescent Development: Susceptibility to Psychiatric Illness". _Frontiers in Psychiatry_ (Review). **4** : 129. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00129. PMC 3796318. PMID 24133461.
  31. **^** Scuderi, C; Filippis, DD; Iuvone, T; Blasio, A; Steardo, A; Esposito, G (May 2009). "Cannabidiol in medicine: a review of its therapeutic potential in CNS disorders". _Phytotherapy Research_ (Review). **23** (5): 597–602. doi:10.1002/ptr.2625. PMID 18844286.
  32. **^** Zuardi, AW; Crippa, JA; Hallak, JE; Bhattacharyya, S; Atakan, Z; Martin-Santos, R; McGuire, PK; Guimarães, FS (2012). "A critical review of the antipsychotic effects of cannabidiol: 30 years of a translational investigation". _Current Pharmaceutical Design_. **18** (32): 5131–40. doi:10.2174/138161212802884681. PMID 22716160.
  33. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Copeland J, Gerber S, Swift W (2006). "Evidence-based answers to cannabis questions: a review of the literature" (PDF). Canberra: Australian National Council on Drugs. Archived from the original on August 21, 2006.CS1 maint: Unfit url (link)
  34. **^** Lev-Ran S, Roerecke M, Le Foll B, et al. (June 2013). "The association between cannabis use and depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies". _Psychological Medicine_ (Review). **44** (24): 797–810. doi:10.1017/S0033291713001438. PMID 23795762.
  35. **^** Gobbi, Gabriella; Atkin, Tobias; Zytynski, Tomasz; Wang, Shouao; Askari, Sorayya; Boruff, Jill; Ware, Mark; Marmorstein, Naomi; Cipriani, Andrea; Dendukuri, Nandini; Mayo, Nancy (13 February 2019). "Cannabis Use in Adolescence and Risk of Depression, Anxiety, and Suicidality in Young Adulthood". _JAMA Psychiatry_. **76** : 426. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2018.4500. PMC 6450286. PMID 30758486. Retrieved 13 February 2019.
  36. **^** Gibbs, Melanie; Winsper, Catherine; Marwaha, Steven; Gilbert, Eleanor; Broome, Matthew; Singh, Swaran P. (January 2015). "Cannabis use and mania symptoms: A systematic review and meta-analysis". _Journal of Affective Disorders_. **171** : 39–47. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2014.09.016. PMID 25285897.
  37. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Serafini G, Pompili M, Innamorati M, et al. (2012). "Can cannabis increase the suicide risk in psychosis? A critical review". _Current Pharmaceutical Design_ (Review). **18** (32): 5165–87. doi:10.2174/138161212802884663. PMID 22716157.
  38. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Calabria B, Degenhardt L, Hall W, Lynskey M (May 2010). "Does cannabis use increase the risk of death? Systematic review of epidemiological evidence on adverse effects of cannabis use". _Drug Alcohol Rev_ (Review). **29** (3): 318–30. doi:10.1111/j.1465-3362.2009.00149.x. PMID 20565525.
  39. **^** Courtney KE, Mejia MH, Jacobus J (2017). "Longitudinal Studies on the Etiology of Cannabis Use Disorder: A Review". _Current Addiction Reports_. **4** (2): 43–52. doi:10.1007/s40429-017-0133-3. PMC 5644349. PMID 29057198.
  40. **^** Badiani A, Boden JM, De Pirro S, Fergusson DM, Horwood LJ, Harold GT (2015). "Tobacco smoking and cannabis use in a longitudinal birth cohort: evidence of reciprocal causal relationships". _Drug and Alcohol Dependence_. **150** : 69–76. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.02.015. PMID 25759089.
  41. **^** Taylor M, Collin SM, Munafò MR, MacLeod J, Hickman M, Heron J (2017). "Patterns of cannabis use during adolescence and their association with harmful substance use behaviour: findings from a UK birth cohort". _Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health_. **71** (8): 764–770. doi:10.1136/jech-2016-208503. PMC 5537531. PMID 28592420.
  42. **^** Rocchetti, M; Crescini, A; Borgwardt, S; Caverzasi, E; Politi, P; Atakan, Z; Fusar-Poli, P (2013). "Is cannabis neurotoxic for the healthy brain? A meta-analytical review of structural brain alterations in non-psychotic users". _Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences_. **67** (7): 483–92. doi:10.1111/pcn.12085. PMID 24118193.
  43. **^** Send to J Clin Pharmacol. 2002 Nov;42(11 Suppl):64S-70S. Cardiovascular consequences of marijuana use. Sidney S
  44. **^** J Clin Pharmacol. 2002 Nov;42(11 Suppl):58S-63S. Cardiovascular system effects of marijuana. Jones RT.
  45. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Bowles DW, O'Bryant, CL; Camidge, DR; Jimeno, A (July 2012). "The intersection between cannabis and cancer in the United States". _Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology_ (Review). **83** (1): 1–10. doi:10.1016/j.critrevonc.2011.09.008. PMID 22019199. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
  46. **^** Stephen Maisto; Mark Galizio; Gerard Connors (2014). _Drug Use and Abuse_. Cengage Learning. p. 278. ISBN 978-1-305-17759-8.
  47. **^** W. Hall; N. Solowij (1998-11-14). "Adverse effects of cannabis". _Lancet_. **352** (9140): 1611–16. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(98)05021-1. PMID 9843121.
  48. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ Tashkin, DP (June 2013). "Effects of marijuana smoking on the lung". _Annals of the American Thoracic Society_. **10** (3): 239–47. doi:10.1513/annalsats.201212-127fr. PMID 23802821.
  49. **^** Hall W, Degenhardt L (2009). "Adverse health effects of non-medical cannabis use". _Lancet_. **374** (9698): 1383–91. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61037-0. PMID 19837255.
  50. **^** Zhang R, Zuo-Feng Z, Morgenstern H, et al. (15 February 2015). "Cannabis smoking and lung cancer risk: Pooled analysis in the International Lung Cancer Consortium". _International Journal of Cancer_. **136** (4): 894–903. doi:10.1002/ijc.29036. PMC 4262725. PMID 24947688.
  51. **^** Hashibe M, Ford DE, Zhang ZF (November 2002). "Marijuana smoking and head and neck cancer". _J Clin Pharmacol_ (Review). **42** (11 Suppl): 103S–107S. doi:10.1002/j.1552-4604.2002.tb06010.x. PMID 12412843.
  52. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ "The impact of cannabis on your lungs". British Lung Association. June 2012. Archived from the original on 2013-09-27. Retrieved 2013-01-09.
  53. **^** "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-10-31. Retrieved 2014-11-01.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  54. **^** de Carvalho, MF; Dourado, MR; Fernandes, IB; Araújo, CT; Mesquita, AT; Ramos-Jorge, ML (15 September 2015). "Head and neck cancer among marijuana users: A meta-analysis of matched case-control studies". _Archives of Oral Biology_. **60** (12): 1750–1755. doi:10.1016/j.archoralbio.2015.09.009. PMID 26433192.
  55. **^** [ _non-primary source needed_ ] [ _needs update_ ] Grotenhermen, F. (2001). "Harm Reduction Associated with Inhalation and Oral Administration of Cannabis and THC". _Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics_. **1** (3–4): 133–152. doi:10.1300/J175v01n03_09.
  56. **^** Tashkin DP (June 2005). "Smoked marijuana as a cause of lung injury". _Monaldi Arch Chest Dis_ (Review). **63** (2): 93–100. doi:10.4081/monaldi.2005.645. PMID 16128224.
  57. **^** Lutchmansingh, D; Pawar, L; Savici, D (2014). "Legalizing Cannabis: A physician's primer on the pulmonary effects of marijuana". _Current Respiratory Care Reports_. **3** (4): 200–205. doi:10.1007/s13665-014-0093-1. PMC 4226845. PMID 25401045.
  58. **^** Fonseca BM, Correia-da-Silva G, Almada M, Costa MA, Teixeira NA (2013). "The Endocannabinoid System in the Postimplantation Period: A Role during Decidualization and Placentation". _Int J Endocrinol_ (Review). **2013** : 1–11. doi:10.1155/2013/510540. PMC 3818851. PMID 24228028. "In fact, maternal marijuana use has been associated with foetal growth restrictions, spontaneous miscarriage, and cognitive deficits in infancy and adolescence."
  59. **^** Irner TB (2012). "Substance exposure in utero and developmental consequences in adolescence: a systematic review". _Child Neuropsychol_ (Review). **18** (6): 521–49. doi:10.1080/09297049.2011.628309. PMID 22114955.

  60. v

  61. t
  62. e

_Cannabis_ plant

* * *

  * Recreational and medical applications
    * rights
  * Industrial applications

General|

  * Autoflowering cannabis
  * _Cannabis_
    * _indica_
    * _ruderalis_
    * _sativa_
    * Difference between _C. indica_ and _C. sativa_
  * Consumption
  * Cultivation
  * Etymology (cannabis, marijuana)
  * Glossary
  * _Cannabis_ strains
  * Synthetic cannabis

Usage|

| General|

  * Medical cannabis
    * History
  * Timeline
  * Religious and spiritual use
    * Chalice

\---|---  
Hemp|

  * Hanfparade
  * List of hemp diseases
  * List of hemp products
    * hempcrete
    * jewelry
    * milk
    * oil
    * paper
  * _Hemp for Victory_
  * Hemp Industries Association
  * _The Emperor Wears No Clothes_

Variants|

  * Cannabis edible
    * Bhang
    * Cannabis tea
  * Cannabis smoking
  * Vaporizing

  * **Preparations**

    * Kief
    * Charas
    * Essential oil
    * Tincture
  * **Extracts by potency**

    * Hash oil
    * Hashish
  * **Phytocannabinoids**

    * Cannabidiol (CBD)
    * Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)

Effects|

  * Cannabis in pregnancy
  * Dependence
  * Effects of cannabis
    * Long-term
  * Endocannabinoid system
  * Impaired driving

Culture|

  * 420
  * Budtender
  * _Cannabis Culture_
  * Competitions
  * Films
  * _High Times_
  * Music
  * Religion
  * Head shop

Pro-cannabis  
organizations|

  * ACT
  * ALCP
  * AMMA
  * ASA
  * CBN
  * CCRMG
  * CLEAR
  * CRC
  * DFCR
  * DPA
  * FAAAT
  * FCA
  * GMM
  * LEAP
  * MAPS
  * MPP
  * NCIA
  * NORML
  * SAFER
  * SCC
  * SSDP
  * VMCA

Use demographics|

  * Adult lifetime use by country
  * Annual use by country

Politics|

| General|

  * Bootleggers and Baptists
  * Drug testing
  * Global Marijuana March
  * Legality of cannabis
  * Legal history in the United States
  * Marijuana Anonymous (MA)
  * Marijuana Control, Regulation, and Education Act
  * Marihuana Tax Act of 1937

\---|---  
Major legal  
reforms|

  * Canada: 2018 Cannabis Act
  * UK: Return to class B
  * Uruguay: Law No. 19172
  * US: 
    * Decriminalization of non-medical use
    * Rescheduling per the Controlled Substances Act
    * Hemp Farming Act of 2018

Politicians  
and parties|

  * Cannabis political parties
  * List of British politicians who have acknowledged cannabis use
  * List of American politicians who have acknowledged cannabis use

Legal cases|

  * _Ker v. California_ (1963)
  * _Leary v. United States_ (1969)
  * _Gonzales v. Raich_ (2005)
  * _Kyllo v. United States_ (thermal imaging) (2001)
  * _ADPF 187_ (2011)

  * ![Cannabis leaf.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a8/Cannabis_leaf.svg/15px-Cannabis_leaf.svg.png) _Cannabis_ portal

  * ![Category](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/48/Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg/16px-Folder_Hexagonal_Icon.svg.png) Category

  * v

  * t
  * e

Cannabinoids

* * *

Phytocannabinoids|

  * Alkylamides
  * Caryophyllene
  * CBC
  * CBCV
  * CBD
  * CBDV
  * CBG
  * CBGM
  * CBGV
  * CBL
  * CBDL
  * CBN
  * CBV
  * Epigallocatechin gallate
  * Gallocatechol
  * Perrottetinene
  * Serinolamide A
  * THC
  * THC-C4
  * THCA
  * THCV
  * Yangonin

  * _Active metabolites:_ 8,11-DiOH-THC

  * 11-COOH-THC
  * 11-OH-THC

Endocannabinoids|

  * Arachidonoyl ethanolamide (AEA; anandamide)
  * 2-Arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG)
  * 2-Arachidonyl glyceryl ether (2-AGE; noladin ether)
  * 2-Oleoylglycerol (2-OG)
  * N-Arachidonoyl dopamine (NADA)
  * N-Arachidonylglycine (NAGly)
  * 2-Arachidonoyl lysophosphatidylinositol (2-ALPI)
  * N-Arachidonoyl serotonin (AA-5-HT)
  * Docosatetraenoylethanolamide (DEA)
  * Lysophosphatidylinositol (LPI)
  * Oleamide
  * Oleoylethanolamide (OEA)
  * Palmitoylethanolamide (PEA)
  * RVD-Hpα
  * Stearoylethanolamide (SEA)
  * O-Arachidonoyl ethanolamine (O-AEA; virodhamine)

Synthetic  
cannabinoids|

| Classical cannabinoids  
(dibenzopyrans)|

  * A-40174
  * A-41988
  * A-42574
  * Ajulemic acid
  * AM-087
  * AM-411
  * AM-855
  * AM-905
  * AM-906
  * AM-919
  * AM-926
  * AM-938
  * AM-2389
  * AM-4030
  * AMG-1
  * AMG-3
  * AMG-36
  * AMG-41
  * Dexanabinol (HU-211)
  * DMHP
  * Dronabinol
  * HHC
  * HU-210
  * HU-243
  * JWH-051
  * JWH-133
  * JWH-139
  * JWH-161
  * JWH-229
  * JWH-359
  * KM-233
  * L-759,633
  * L-759,656
  * Levonantradol (CP 50,5561)
  * Menabitan
  * Nabazenil
  * Nabidrox (Canbisol)
  * Nabilone
  * Nabitan
  * Naboctate
  * O-224
  * O-581
  * O-774
  * O-806
  * O-823
  * O-1057
  * O-1125
  * O-1191
  * O-1238
  * O-2048
  * O-2113
  * O-2365
  * O-2372
  * O-2373
  * O-2383
  * O-2426
  * O-2484
  * O-2545
  * O-2694
  * O-2715
  * O-2716
  * O-3223
  * O-3226
  * Parahexyl
  * Pirnabine
  * THC-O-acetate
  * THC-O-phosphate

\---|---  
Non-classical  
cannabinoids|

  * Cannabicyclohexanol
  * CBD-DMH
  * CP 47,497
  * (C6)-CP 47,497
  * (C9)-CP 47,497
  * CP 55,244
  * CP 55,940
  * HU-308
  * HU-320
  * HU-331
  * HU-336
  * HU-345
  * HU-446
  * HU-465
  * HU-910
  * HUF-101
  * Nonabine
  * O-1376
  * O-1422
  * O-1601
  * O-1656
  * O-1657
  * O-1660
  * O-1663
  * O-1871
  * SPA-229
  * Tinabinol

Benzoylindoles|

  * 1-Butyl-3-(2-methoxybenzoyl)indole
  * 1-Butyl-3-(4-methoxybenzoyl)indole
  * 1-Pentyl-3-(2-methoxybenzoyl)indole
  * AM-630
  * AM-679
  * AM-694
  * AM-1241
  * AM-2233
  * GW-405,833 (L-768,242)
  * Pravadoline
  * RCS-4
  * WIN 54,461

Naphthoylindoles|

  * AM-1220
  * AM-1221
  * AM-1235
  * AM-2201
  * AM-2232
  * CHM-081
  * EAM-2201
  * FUB-JWH-018
  * JWH-007
  * JWH-015
  * JWH-018
  * JWH-019
  * JWH-073
  * JWH-081
  * JWH-098
  * JWH-116
  * JWH-122
  * JWH-149
  * JWH-164
  * JWH-182
  * JWH-193
  * JWH-198
  * JWH-200
  * JWH-210
  * JWH-398
  * JWH-424
  * MAM-1220
  * MAM-2201
  * NE-CHMIMO

Naphthoylindazoles|

  * THJ-018
  * THJ-2201

Pyrrolobenzoxazines|

  * WIN 55,212-2

Naphthylmethylindoles|

  * JWH-175
  * JWH-176
  * JWH-184
  * JWH-185
  * JWH-192
  * JWH-194
  * JWH-195
  * JWH-196
  * JWH-197
  * JWH-199

Phenylacetylindoles|

  * Cannabipiperidiethanone
  * JWH-167
  * JWH-203
  * JWH-249
  * JWH-250
  * JWH-251
  * JWH-302
  * RCS-8

Indole-3-carboxamides|

  * 5F-ADBICA
  * 5F-NNE1
  * 5F-PCN
  * 5F-SDB-006
  * AB-FUBICA
  * AB-PICA
  * ADBICA
  * ADB-FUBICA
  * APICA
  * CUMYL-BICA
  * CUMYL-PICA
  * CUMYL-5F-PICA
  * FDU-NNE1
  * MDMB-CHMICA
  * MMB-2201
  * MN-25 (UR-12)
  * NNE1
  * PX-1
  * Org 28312
  * Org 28611
  * SDB-006
  * STS-135

Indole-3-carboxylates|

  * 5F-PB-22
  * FDU-PB-22
  * FUB-PB-22
  * QUCHIC (BB-22)
  * QUPIC (PB-22)
  * NM-2201

Tetramethylcyclo-  
propanoylindoles|

  * 5Br-UR-144
  * 5Cl-UR-144
  * A-796,260
  * A-834,735
  * FUB-144
  * UR-144
  * XLR-11
  * XLR-12

Indazole-3-  
carboxamides|

  * 5Cl-APINACA
  * 5F-ADB
  * 5F-ADB-PINACA
  * 5F-AMB
  * 5F-APINACA
  * 5F-CUMYL-PINACA
  * 5F-EMB-PINACA
  * AB-CHMINACA
  * AB-FUBINACA
  * AB-FUBINACA 2-fluorobenzyl isomer
  * AB-PINACA
  * ADB-CHMINACA
  * ADB-FUBINACA
  * ADB-PINACA
  * Adamantyl-THPINACA
  * ADSB-FUB-187
  * AMB-CHMINACA
  * AMB-FUBINACA
  * APINACA (AKB48)
  * APP-FUBINACA
  * CUMYL-4CN-BINACA
  * CUMYL-PINACA
  * CUMYL-THPINACA
  * EMB-FUBINACA
  * FUB-APINACA
  * MDMB-FUBINACA
  * MDMB-CHMINACA
  * MN-18
  * PX-2
  * PX-3

Tetramethylcyclo-  
propanoylindazoles|

  * FAB-144

Naphthoylpyrroles|

  * JWH-030
  * JWH-147
  * JWH-307
  * JWH-369
  * JWH-370

Eicosanoids|

  * AM-883
  * AM-1346
  * ACEA
  * ACPA
  * Methanandamide (AM-356)
  * O-585
  * O-689
  * O-1812
  * O-1860
  * O-1861

Pyrazolecarboxamides|

  * 5F-AB-FUPPYCA
  * AB-CHFUPYCA

Others|

  * 4-HTMPIPO
  * 5F-PY-PICA
  * 5F-PY-PINACA
  * 5F-3-pyridinoylindole
  * A-836,339
  * A-955,840
  * Abnormal cannabidiol
  * AB-001
  * BzODZ-EPyr
  * AM-1248
  * AM-1714
  * AZ-11713908
  * BAY 38-7271
  * BAY 59-3074
  * BIM-018
  * CB-13
  * CB-86
  * CBS-0550
  * CUMYL-4CN-B7AICA
  * 5F-CUMYL-P7AICA
  * CUMYL-PEGACLONE
  * FUBIMINA
  * GSK-554,418A
  * GW-842,166X
  * JTE 7-31
  * LASSBio-881
  * LBP-1
  * Leelamine
  * MDA-7
  * MDA-19
  * MEPIRAPIM
  * NESS-040C5
  * NMP-7
  * O-889
  * O-1269
  * O-1270
  * O-1399
  * O-1602
  * O-2220
  * Olorinab
  * PF-03550096
  * PSB-SB-1202
  * PTI-1
  * PTI-2
  * QMPSB
  * S-444,823
  * SER-601
  * Tedalinab
  * URB-447
  * VSN-16
  * WIN 56,098

Allosteric CBR ligands|

  * Org 27569
  * Org 27759
  * Org 29647
  * RTI-371
  * Pregnenolone

Endocannabinoid  
enhancers  
(inactivation inhibitors)|

  * 4-Nonylphenylboronic acid
  * AM-404
  * Arachidonoyl serotonin
  * Arvanil
  * BIA 10-2474
  * Biochanin A
  * CAY-10401
  * CAY-10429
  * Genistein
  * Guineesine
  * IDFP
  * JNJ 1661010
  * JNJ-42165279
  * JZL184
  * JZL195
  * Kaempferol
  * LY-2183240
  * MK-4409
  * O-1624
  * O-2093
  * Oleoylethanolamide (OEA)
  * Olvanil
  * Palmitoylethanolamide (PEA)
  * PF-04457845
  * PF-622
  * PF-750
  * PF-3845
  * PHOP
  * URB-447
  * URB-597
  * URB-602
  * URB-754
  * VDM-11

Anticannabinoids  
(antagonists/inverse  
agonists/antibodies)|

  * AM-251
  * AM-281
  * AM-630
  * AM-1387
  * AM-4113
  * AM-6527
  * AM-6545
  * BML-190
  * Brizantin (Бризантин)
  * CAY-10508
  * CB-25
  * CB-52
  * CB-86
  * Dietressa (Диетресса)
  * Drinabant (AVE1625)
  * Hemopressin
  * Ibipinabant (SLV319)
  * JTE-907
  * LH-21
  * LY-320,135
  * MDA-77
  * MJ-15
  * MK-9470
  * NESS-0327
  * NIDA-41020
  * O-606
  * O-1184
  * O-1248
  * O-1918
  * O-2050
  * O-2654
  * Otenabant (CP-945,598)
  * PF-514273
  * PipISB
  * PSB-SB-487
  * Rimonabant (SR141716)
  * Rosonabant (E-6776)
  * SR-144,528
  * Surinabant (SR147778)
  * Taranabant (MK-0364)
  * TM-38837
  * VCHSR

  * _**See also:** Cannabinoid receptor modulators (cannabinoids by pharmacology)_

  * _List of:AM cannabinoids_
  * _JWH cannabinoids_
  * _Designer drugs § Synthetic cannabimimetics_

  * v

  * t
  * e

Recreational drug use

* * *

Major  
recreational  
drugs|

| Depressants|

  * Barbiturates
  * Benzodiazepines
  * Carbamates
  * Ethanol (alcohol)
    * Alcoholic drinks
    * Beer
    * Wine
  * Gabapentinoids
  * GHB
  * Inhalants
    * Medical 
    * Nitrous oxide
    * Hazardous solvents
    * contact adhesives
    * Gasoline
    * nail polish remover
    * Paint thinner
    * Other 
    * Freon
  * Kava
  * Nonbenzodiazepines
  * Quinazolinones

\---|---  
Opioids|

  * Buprenorphine
    * Suboxone
    * Subutex
  * Codeine
  * Desomorphine
    * Krokodil
  * Dextropropoxyphene
    * Darvocet
    * Darvon
  * Fentanyl
  * Diamorphine
    * Heroin
  * Hydrocodone
  * Hydromorphone
    * Dilaudid
  * Methadone
  * Mitragyna speciosa
    * Kratom
  * Morphine
    * Opium
  * Oxycodone
    * /paracetamol
  * Tramadol

Stimulants|

  * Amphetamine
  * Arecoline
    * Areca
  * Betel
  * Caffeine
    * Coffee
    * Energy drinks
    * Tea
  * Cathinone
    * Khat
  * Cocaine
    * Coca
    * Crack
  * Ephedrine
    * Ephedra
  * MDPV
  * Mephedrone
  * Methamphetamine
  * Methylone
  * Methylphenidate
  * Modafinil
  * Nicotine
    * Tobacco
  * Theobromine
    * Cocoa
    * Chocolate

Entactogens|

  * 2C series
  * 6-APB
    * Benzofury
  * AMT
  * MDA
  * MDMA
    * Ecstasy

Hallucinogens|

| Psychedelics|

  * Bufotenin
    * Psychoactive toads
    * Vilca
    * Yopo
  * DMT
    * Ayahuasca
  * LSA
  * LSD-25
  * Mescaline
    * Peruvian torch
    * Peyote
    * San Pedro
  * Psilocybin / Psilocin
    * Psilocybin mushrooms

\---|---  
Dissociatives|

  * DXM
  * Glaucine
  * Inhalants
    * Nitrous oxide
    * alkyl nitrites
    * poppers
    * amyl nitrite
  * Ketamine
  * MXE
  * Muscimol
    * Amanita muscaria
  * PCP
  * Salvinorin A
    * Salvia divinorum

Deliriants|

  * Atropine and Scopolamine
    * Atropa belladonna
    * Datura
    * Hyoscyamus niger
    * Mandragora officinarum
  * Dimenhydrinate
  * Diphenhydramine

Cannabinoids|

  * JWH-018
  * THC
    * Cannabis
    * Hashish
    * Hash oil
    * Marijuana

Oneirogens|

  * Calea zacatechichi
  * Silene capensis

Club drugs|

  * Cocaine
  * Quaaludes
  * MDMA (Ecstasy)
  * Nitrous oxide
  * Poppers

Drug culture|

| Cannabis culture|

  * 420
  * Cannabis cultivation
  * Cannabis smoking
  * Head shop
  * Legal history of cannabis in the United States
  * Legality of cannabis
  * Marijuana Policy Project
  * Medical cannabis
  * NORML
  * Cannabis and religion
  * Stoner film

\---|---  
Coffee culture|

  * Coffee break
  * Coffeehouse
  * Latte art
  * Tea house

Drinking culture|

  * Bartending
  * Beer culture
  * Beer festival
  * Binge drinking
  * Diethyl ether
  * Drinking games
  * Drinking song
  * Happy hour
  * Hip flask
  * Nightclub
  * Pub
  * Pub crawl
  * Sommelier
  * Sports bar
  * Tailgate party
  * Wine bar
  * Wine tasting

Psychedelia|

  * Psychonautics
  * Art
  * Drug
  * Era
  * Experience
  * Literature
  * Music
  * Microdosing
  * Therapy

Smoking culture|

  * Cigarette card
  * Fashion cigarettes
  * Cloud-chasing
  * Loosie
  * Smokeasy
  * Smoking fetishism
  * Tobacco smoking

Other|

  * Club drug
  * Counterculture of the 1960s
  * Dance party
  * Drug paraphernalia
  * Drug tourism
  * Entheogen
  * Hippie
  * Needle sharing
  * Nootropic
  * Party and play
  * Poly drug use
  * Rave
  * Religion and drugs
  * Self-medication
  * Sex and drugs
  * Whoonga

Drug  
production  
and trade|

| Drug  
production|

  * Coca production in Colombia
  * Drug precursors
  * Opium production in Afghanistan
  * Rolling meth lab

\---|---  
Drug trade|

  * Illegal drug trade
    * Colombia
  * Darknet market
  * Drug distribution
    * Beer shop
    * Cannabis shop
    * Liquor store
    * Liquor license

Issues with  
drug use|

  * Abuse
  * Date rape drug
  * Impaired driving
  * Drug harmfulness
    * Effects of cannabis
  * Addiction
  * Dependence
    * Prevention
    * Opioid replacement therapy
    * Rehabilitation
    * Responsible use
  * Drug-related crime
  * Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
  * Long-term effects of cannabis
  * Neurotoxicity
  * Overdose
  * Passive smoking
    * of tobacco or other substances

Legality of  
drug use|

| International|

  * 1961 Narcotic Drugs
  * 1971 Psychotropic Substances
  * 1988 Drug Trafficking
  * Council of the European Union decisions on designer drugs

\---|---  
State level|

  * Drug policy
    * Decriminalization
    * Prohibition
    * Supply reduction
  * Policy reform
    * Demand reduction
    * Drug Policy Alliance
    * Harm reduction
    * Law Enforcement Action Partnership
    * Liberalization
    * Latin America
    * Students for Sensible Drug Policy
    * Transform Drug Policy Foundation

Drug policy  
by country|

  * Australia
  * Canada
  * Germany
  * India
  * Netherlands
  * Portugal
  * Slovakia
  * Soviet Union
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * United States
    * Just Say No
    * Office of National Drug Control Policy
    * School district drug policies
    * California
    * Colorado
    * Maryland
    * Virginia

Other|

  * Arguments for and against drug prohibition
  * Capital punishment for drug trafficking
  * Cognitive liberty
  * Designer drug
  * Drug court
  * Drug possession
  * Drug test
  * Narc
  * Politics of drug abuse
  * War on Drugs
    * Mexican Drug War
    * Plan Colombia
    * Philippine Drug War
  * Zero tolerance

Lists of  
countries by...|

  * Alcohol legality
    * Alcohol consumption
  * Anabolic steroid legality
  * Cannabis legality
    * Annual use
    * Lifetime use
  * Cigarette consumption
  * Cocaine legality
    * Cocaine use
  * Methamphetamine legality
  * Opiates use
  * Psilocybin mushrooms legality
  * Salvia legality

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Long-
term_effects_of_cannabis&oldid=901048319"

Categories:

  * Cannabis and health

Hidden categories:

  * CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he)
  * CS1 maint: Unfit url
  * CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
  * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
  * All pages needing factual verification
  * Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from December 2013
  * Wikipedia articles in need of updating from December 2013
  * All Wikipedia articles in need of updating
  * Wikipedia introduction cleanup from December 2013
  * All pages needing cleanup
  * Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2013
  * All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * Edit
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * فارسی
  * Français

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 9 June 2019, at 10:06 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor

