

![Tara McMullin](http://taragentile.com/wp-content/uploads/tara-mcmullin-

logo.jpg)

  * About + Contact
    * Speaking
    * Courses
  * Podcast
  * Articles
  * Join The Network

Select Page

# 5 Ways to Generate Revenue Now Without Having a Sale

Art of Earning

There are lots of reasons you might need to generate revenue right now. You're
moving, you're having a baby, you're feeling the pinch at tax time, you want
to redesign your website, you want to take a trip.

Needing to generate revenue _now_ isn 't something to feel bad about. It
happens in successful businesses, it happens in little businesses, it happens
in big businesses. It's just part of being in business!

So let’s make you some money— _and soon_.

### 1) Send a sales email about your bestselling product or service to

generate revenue.

What's your #1 seller? There are people on your list who haven't bought this
product or service and likely would, if they knew about it. Even when we think
"everyone" has bought our main product, there are people you're connected to
who still don't know it exists.

Last week, I casually linked to my bestselling product, The Art of Earning,
and—without mentioning it by name—quadrupled sales over the week before.

**Sometimes the best way to generate new revenue is to focus on old assets.**
What could you craft a fresh sales cycle for?

### 2) Beta test a product or program that's been on your mind to serve

clients & make money now.

I know you: you're sitting on a great idea. You haven't figured out how to
make the time, find the money, or craft the sales process for that new product
or program you have in mind.

**Pro tip: don 't.**

Write down everything you _know_ about the first iteration of this product.
Then write down all the reasons your best customers or most engaged audience
members need it. Put those things together with a strong pitch and present it
to a select few you know will dig it.

You'll thrill the early adopters in your audience. You'll offer killer value
for a great price. And you'll be that many steps ahead when you go to do a
bigger launch on a more refined version.

### 3) Raise your prices to leverage existing sales.

Two ways you can approach this one. If you're regularly selling something
that's been on the shelf for a while, you can just raise the price to give you
a revenue boost.

The other way to tackle this is by giving your customers a heads up on an
impending price increase. There's probably something sitting on your "shelf"
that could use a 10-50% bump in price. Craft an email that let's people know
the price is going up and they have until a certain date to get the
item/program/service at a lower rate.

### 4) Repackage what's already on the shelf.

Often, businesses have several smaller products that can be repackaged as a
bundle with more value. In fact, the repackaged product might even have a
_more compelling_ value proposition as a package than as individual products.

If you're a jewelry designer, you might try to package up a necklace,
bracelet, and pair of earrings. Simple, right? But the result is a greater
value than the sum of its parts; it’s now a night-on-the-town kit.

If you're a health coach, you might try to package a recipe book, coaching
program, and one-off session with you. Again, simple. And again, the result is
a greater value than the sum of its parts; it's now the method, the
accountability, and the day-to-day information you need to succeed all-in-one.

**What do you currently sell that actually makes more sense _together_?  
**

### 5) Find a partner to create new value.

The best collaborations often start from very small joint ventures. If there's
someone in your network you've been dying to connect and create with, this
could be the time to jump on it.

_By your powers combined_ , you could whip up a workshop or small event that
will have both of your audiences asking for more. You get the chance to test
drive the partnership, your audiences get value that they couldn't have gotten
from either one of you individually, and you generate some revenue to boot.

The trick here is to keep the scope small and the expectations for each party
well-defined. That benefits both of you… and your customers.

A word to the wise: it's easy to fall into a pattern of gotta-make-money-now
in business, especially once you realize how easy it can be. However, planning
for revenue, proper product & customer development, and sales cycles will
always be the real key to feeling secure in your business.

Part of truly stepping into entrepreneurship is understanding how easy it is
to generate more revenue. If your cash flow is feeling a bit tight, I
encourage you to try one of these ideas and get a taste for the
entrepreneurial money mindset yourself.

  * __

  * __

  * __

20

  * __

  * __

  * __

![](https://i0.wp.com/s3.amazonaws.com/taragentile/taragentile_headshot_small.jpg?w=1080&ssl=1)

Tara Gentile is on a mission to turn the small business owners of today into
the economic powerhouses of tomorrow. She's the creator of Quiet Power
Strategy®, a business design system and entrepreneurial family. She's also the
host of Profit. Power. Pursuit., which Entrepreneur named one of the 24 top
woman-hosted business podcasts.

> Tara Gentile

![](https://i1.wp.com/static.shareasale.com/image/59453/Business_300x250_V2.jpg?w=1080)

#### Explore

  * Books
  * Workshops
  * Work With Me
  * Speaking
  * On Marketing
  * On Business Models
  * On Customers
  * On Strategy

  * Facebook

  * Twitter
  * RSS

©2010-18 CoCommercial, LLC | Terms of Use & Privacy Policy

Let's stay in touch.

Every week, I send out some thoughts, announcements, or training on what I see
working for small business owners today. I'd love to send it to you too-and
hear back from you when something really hits home or helps out. You in?

YOUR NAME:

YOUR EMAIL:

I respect your privacy and treat your personal information with the utmost
care. Click here to view my privacy policy.

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor

