

  * Cooking

  * Science

  * Industry

  * Growing

  * Policy

  * Advocacy

  * Medical

  * Culture

  * Events

  * _Platform Privacy_

  * _Privacy Settings_

  *     *       *         *   * ![Logo](https://theweedblog.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTYxNjk0Nzg0NDk3Mzk0OTkw/navbar.png)

  * Cooking
  * Science
  * Industry
  * Growing
  * Policy
  * Advocacy
  * Medical
  * Culture
  * Events

  *     *       *         * 

![](https://theweedblog.com/.image/c_fit%2Ccs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_700/MTYwMzUwNzc1OTUwNzEzOTM1/large.png)

  * ![Logo](https://theweedblog.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTYxNjk0Nzg0NDk3Mzk0OTkw/navbar.png)
  * Cooking
  * Science
  * Industry
  * Growing
  * Policy
  * Advocacy
  * Medical
  * Culture
  * Events

# How Much Marijuana Does It Take For Someone To Overdose?

Author:

    
    
    Johnny Green
    

Publish date:

    
    
    Aug 24, 2013
    

Updated on

    
    
    Mar 25, 2019
    

  *     *       * 

My friend is new to the marijuana world. He had never smoked marijuana before
in his life. At the age of 50, due to health problems, he decided to start
consuming marijuana because pharmaceuticals weren't working and were wreaking
havoc on his body.

![marijuana lab laboratory

testing](https://theweedblog.com/.image/t_share/MTYyOTA0MTY5MTc2MzExMzg0/marijuana-

lab-laboratory-testing.jpg)

He always asks me questions, and I'm going to try to post answers on TWB in
case there are others out there. Also, I'm hoping people post their knowledge
in the comments section below so that others can benefit. If you find some
good info on marijuana overdose information, feel free to post it below.

The question I'm answering today is 'how much marijuana does it take for
someone to overdose?' My friend is well aware that no one in recorded history
has ever died from a marijuana overdose. But he wants to know if there is
_any_ amount of marijuana that someone could overdose from. According to a
1988 United States administrative law hearing:

"7. Drugs used in medicine are routinely given what is called an LD-50. The
LD-50 rating indicates at what dosage fifty percent of test animals receiving
a drug will die as a result of drug induced toxicity. A number of researchers
have attempted to determine marijuana's LD-50 rating in test animals, without
success. Simply stated, researchers have been unable to give animals enough
marijuana to induce death.

8\. At present it is estimated that marijuana's LD-50 is around 1:20,000 or
1:40,000. In layman terms this means that in order to induce death a marijuana
smoker would have to consume 20,000 to 40,000 times as much marijuana as is
contained in one marijuana cigarette. NIDA-supplied marijuana cigarettes weigh
approximately .9 grams. **A smoker would theoretically have to consume nearly
1,500 pounds of marijuana within about fifteen minutes to induce a lethal
response.**

9\. In practical terms, marijuana cannot induce a lethal response as a result
of drug-related toxicity. "

Even if someone is smoking marijuana concentrates or 'dabs' which can be 3-4
times more potent than their flower counterparts, that's still hundreds of
pounds of marijuana dabs within a 15 minute period. A person would pass out
before they experienced a lethal dose level of marijuana. Something could harm
the person if they fell while passing out resulting in death, but that's
different than the marijuana itself causing death. Some readers are probably
wondering why the federal government fights so hard against marijuana
research. Maybe it's because every time they research marijuana they find out
how wrong they are...

Tags

terms:

    
    
    dabsoverdoseconcentrates
    

By

Johnny Green

  *     *       * 

#

![Related](https://theweedblog.com/.image/cs_srgb%2Cq_auto:good/MTYxODEwNDcyOTMxMTc0MDEz/section_header_art_xtrasmall_related.svg)

![Dabs Can You Make with

Marijuana](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyOTA0MjQxMTE1MzA5OTIx/dabs.jpg)

Marijuana Tips and Tricks

## How Much Dabs Can You Make with Marijuana?

![Dabs Are Good Or

Bad](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyOTA0Njc4NjY2MjgyODQ5/dab-

slabs.jpg)

Opinion

## How To Tell If Marijuana Dabs Are Good Or Bad

![How Much Does Medical Marijuana Cost To Grow? promo

image](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyOTAzMDU1OTcxOTE5NzEz/how-

much-does-medical-marijuana-cost-to-grow-promo-image.jpg)

Medical Marijuana Policy

## How Much Does Medical Marijuana Cost To Grow?

![Dabs Can You Make with

Marijuana](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyOTA0MjQxMTE1MzA5OTIx/dabs.jpg)

Marijuana Business News

## Marijuana Concentrate Makers Need To Speak Up

![Sign Petition To Tell Obama To Stop Attacks On Medical Cannabis Patients

promo

image](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyOTAyOTcxNjg4MTAxNzI5/sign-

petition-to-tell-obama-to-stop-attacks-on-medical-cannabis-patients-promo-

image.jpg)

Medical Marijuana Policy

## How Many Petitions Does It Take To Get Obama To Respect Medical Marijuana?

![marijuana lab laboratory

testing](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyOTA0MTY5MTc2MzExMzg0/marijuana-

lab-laboratory-testing.jpg)

Marijuana Video

## How Marijuana Is Tested

![nug](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyOTAzMDEzMjk0NzQ1MTc2/nug.jpg)

Ending Marijuana Prohibition

## How Much Marijuana Does California Consume?

![sensi star marijuana

strain](https://theweedblog.com/.image/ar_16:9%2Cc_fill%2Ccs_srgb%2Cfl_progressive%2Cg_faces:center%2Cq_auto:good%2Cw_620/MTYyOTA0MTY3Mjk1MDM0OTY4/sensi-

star-marijuana-strain.jpg)

Marijuana Science

## How Safe Is Marijuana?

  * Platform Privacy

(C) 2019 The Weed Blog

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor

