

![Page semi-protected](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/1/1b/Semi-

protection-shackle.svg/20px-Semi-protection-shackle.svg.png)

# Crime

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

For other uses, see Crime (disambiguation).

"Criminal" redirects here. For other uses, see Criminal (disambiguation).

"Offender" redirects here. For the film, see Offender (film).

## Criminal law

Elements

  * _Actus reus_
  * _Mens rea_
  * Causation
  * Concurrence

Scope of criminal liability

  * Complicity
  * Corporate
  * Vicarious

Severity of offense

  * Felony
  * Infraction (also called violation)
  * Misdemeanor

Inchoate offenses

  * Attempt
  * Conspiracy
  * Incitement
  * Solicitation

Offence against the person  
|

  * Assassination
  * Assault
  * Battery
  * Child abuse
  * Criminal negligence
  * Defamation
  * False imprisonment
  * Harassment
  * Home invasion
  * Homicide
  * Intimidation
  * Kidnapping
  * Manslaughter (corporate)
  * Mayhem
  * Murder
    * corporate
  * Negligent homicide
  * Invasion of privacy
  * Robbery
  * Torture

* * *

Sexual offences

  * Adultery
  * Bigamy
  * Fornication
  * Incest
  * Indecent exposure
  * Masturbation
  * Obscenity
  * Prostitution
  * Rape
  * Sexual assault
  * Sodomy

Crimes against property

  * Arson
  * Blackmail
  * Bribery
  * Burglary
  * Embezzlement
  * Extortion
  * False pretenses
  * Fraud
  * Gambling
  * Intellectual property violation
  * Larceny
  * Payola
  * Pickpocketing
  * Possessing stolen property
  * Robbery
  * Smuggling
  * Tax evasion
  * Theft

Crimes against justice

  * Compounding
  * Malfeasance in office
  * Miscarriage of justice
  * Misprision
  * Obstruction
  * Perjury
  * Perverting the course of justice

Crimes against the public

  * Apostasy
  * Begging
  * Censorship violation
  * Dueling
  * Illegal consumption (such as prohibition of drugs, alcohol, and smoking)
  * Suicide
  * Terrorism

Crimes against animals

  * Cruelty to animals
  * Wildlife smuggling
  * Bestiality

Crimes against the state

  * Lèse-majesté
  * Treason

Defences to liability

  * Automatism
  * Consent
  * Defence of property
  * Diminished responsibility
  * Duress
  * Entrapment
  * _Ignorantia juris non excusat_
  * Infancy
  * Insanity
  * Justification
  * Mistake (of law)
  * Necessity
  * Provocation
  * Self-defence

Other common-law areas

  * Contracts
  * Evidence
  * Property
  * Torts
  * Wills, trusts and estates

Portals

  * Criminal justice
  * Law

  * v

  * t
  * e

Criminology  
and penology

* * *

![Pentonvilleiso19.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/6e/Pentonvilleiso19.jpg/220px-

Pentonvilleiso19.jpg)

Theory

  * Anomie
  * Biosocial criminology
  * Broken windows
  * Collective efficacy
  * Crime analysis
  * Criminalization
  * Differential association
  * Deviance
  * Labeling theory
  * Psychopathy
  * Rational choice
  * Social control
  * Social disorganization
  * Social learning
  * Strain
  * Subculture
  * Symbolic interactionism
  * Victimology

Types of crime

  * Against humanity
  * Blue-collar
  * Corporate
  * Juvenile
  * Organized
  * Political
  * Public-order
  * State
  * State-corporate
  * Victimless
  * White-collar
  * War

Methods

  * Comparative
  * Profiling
  * Critical theory
  * Ethnography
  * Uniform Crime Reports
  * Crime mapping
  * Positivist school
  * Qualitative
  * Quantitative
  * BJS
  * NIBRS

Penology

|

  * Denunciation
  * Deterrence
  * Incapacitation
  * Trial
  * Prison
    * abolition
    * open
    * reform
  * Prisoner
    * Prisoner abuse
    * Prisoners' rights
  * Rehabilitation
  * Recidivism

* * *

Justice in penology

  * Participatory
  * Restorative
  * Retributive
  * Solitary confinement

Schools

  * Chicago school
  * Classical school
  * Conflict criminology
  * Critical criminology
  * Environmental criminology
  * Feminist school
  * Integrative criminology
  * Italian school
  * Left realism
  * Marxist criminology
  * Neo-classical school
  * Positivist school
  * Postmodernist school
  * Right realism

Subfields

  * American
  * Anthropological
  * Biosocial criminology
  * Conflict
  * Criminology
  * Critical
  * Culture
  * Cyber
  * Demography
  * Development
  * Environmental
  * Experimental
  * Organizational
  * Political
  * Public
  * Radical criminology

Browse

  * Index
  * Journals
  * Organizations
  * People

  * v

  * t
  * e

In ordinary language, a **crime** is an unlawful act punishable by a state or
other authority.[1] The term "crime" does not, in modern criminal law, have
any simple and universally accepted definition,[2] though statutory
definitions have been provided for certain purposes.[3] The most popular view
is that crime is a category created by law; in other words, something is a
crime if declared as such by the relevant and applicable law.[2] One proposed
definition is that a crime or **offence** (or **criminal offence** ) is an act
harmful not only to some individual but also to a community, society or the
state ("a public wrong"). Such acts are forbidden and punishable by law.[1][4]

The notion that acts such as murder, rape and theft are to be prohibited
exists worldwide.[5] What precisely is a criminal offence is defined by
criminal law of each country. While many have a catalogue of crimes called the
criminal code, in some common law countries no such comprehensive statute
exists.

The state (government) has the power to severely restrict one's liberty for
committing a crime. In modern societies, there are procedures to which
investigations and trials must adhere. If found guilty, an offender may be
sentenced to a form of reparation such as a community sentence, or, depending
on the nature of their offence, to undergo imprisonment, life imprisonment or,
in some jurisdictions, execution.

Usually, to be classified as a crime, the "act of doing something criminal" (
_actus reus_ ) must - with certain exceptions - be accompanied by the
"intention to do something criminal" ( _mens rea_ ).[4]

While every crime violates the law, not every violation of the law counts as a
crime. Breaches of private law (torts and breaches of contract) are not
automatically punished by the state, but can be enforced through civil
procedure.

## Contents

  * 1 Overview
  * 2 Etymology
  * 3 Definition
    * 3.1 England and Wales
    * 3.2 Scotland
    * 3.3 Sociology
    * 3.4 Other definitions
  * 4 Criminalization
  * 5 Labelling theory
  * 6 Natural-law theory
  * 7 History
    * 7.1 Ancient Near East
    * 7.2 Rome and its Legacy in Europe
  * 8 Classification and categorisation
    * 8.1 Categorisation by type
    * 8.2 Categorisation by penalty
    * 8.3 Common law
    * 8.4 Classification by mode of trial
    * 8.5 Classification by origin
    * 8.6 Other classifications
    * 8.7 U.S. classification
  * 9 Reports, studies and organizations
  * 10 Offence in common law jurisdictions
  * 11 Causes and correlates of crime
  * 12 Crimes in international law
  * 13 Religion and crime
  * 14 Military jurisdictions and states of emergency
  * 15 Employee crime
  * 16 See also
  * 17 Notes
  * 18 References
  * 19 External links

## Overview

When informal relationships prove insufficient to establish and maintain a
desired social order, a government or a state may impose more formalized or
stricter systems of social control. With institutional and legal machinery at
their disposal, agents of the State can compel populations to conform to codes
and can opt to punish or attempt to reform those who do not conform.

Authorities employ various mechanisms to regulate (encouraging or
discouraging) certain behaviors in general. Governing or administering
agencies may for example codify rules into laws, police citizens and visitors
to ensure that they comply with those laws, and implement other policies and
practices that legislators or administrators have prescribed with the aim of
discouraging or preventing crime. In addition, authorities provide remedies
and sanctions, and collectively these constitute a criminal justice system.
Legal sanctions vary widely in their severity; they may include (for example)
incarceration of temporary character aimed at reforming the convict. Some
jurisdictions have penal codes written to inflict permanent harsh punishments:
legal mutilation, capital punishment or life without parole.

Usually, a natural person perpetrates a crime, but legal persons may also
commit crimes. Conversely, at least under U.S. law, nonpersons such as animals
cannot commit crimes.[6]

The sociologist Richard Quinney has written about the relationship between
society and crime. When Quinney states "crime is a social phenomenon" he
envisages both how individuals conceive crime and how populations perceive it,
based on societal norms.[7]

## Etymology

The word _crime_ is derived from the Latin root _cernō_ , meaning "I decide, I
give judgment". Originally the Latin word _crīmen_ meant "charge" or "cry of
distress."[8] The Ancient Greek word _krima_ (κρίμα), from which the Latin
cognate derives, typically referred to an intellectual mistake or an offense
against the community, rather than a private or moral wrong.[9]

In 13th century English _crime_ meant "sinfulness", according to
etymonline.com. It was probably brought to England as Old French _crimne_
(12th century form of Modern French _crime_ ), from Latin _crimen_ (in the
genitive case: _criminis_ ). In Latin, _crimen_ could have signified any one
of the following: "charge, indictment, accusation; crime, fault, offense".

The word may derive from the Latin _cernere_ – "to decide, to sift" (see
crisis, mapped on Kairos and Chronos). But Ernest Klein (citing Karl Brugmann)
rejects this and suggests *cri-men, which originally would have meant "cry of
distress". Thomas G. Tucker suggests a root in "cry" words and refers to
English plaint, plaintiff, and so on. The meaning "offense punishable by law"
dates from the late 14th century. The Latin word is glossed in Old English by
_facen_ , also "deceit, fraud, treachery", [cf. fake]. _Crime wave_ is first
attested in 1893 in American English.

## Definition

### England and Wales

Whether a given act or omission constitutes a crime does not depend on the
nature of that act or omission. It depends on the nature of the legal
consequences that may follow it.[10] An act or omission is a crime if it is
capable of being followed by what are called criminal proceedings.[11][12]

**History**

The following definition of "crime" was provided by the Prevention of Crimes
Act 1871, and applied[13] for the purposes of section 10 of the Prevention of
Crime Act 1908:

> The expression "crime" means, in England and Ireland, any felony or the
offence of uttering false or counterfeit coin, or of possessing counterfeit
gold or silver coin, or the offence of obtaining goods or money by false
pretences, or the offence of conspiracy to defraud, or any misdemeanour under
the fifty-eighth section of the Larceny Act, 1861.

### Scotland

For the purpose of section 243 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations
(Consolidation) Act 1992, a crime means an offence punishable on indictment,
or an offence punishable on summary conviction, and for the commission of
which the offender is liable under the statute making the offence punishable
to be imprisoned either absolutely or at the discretion of the court as an
alternative for some other punishment.[14]

### Sociology

A normative definition views crime as deviant behavior that violates
prevailing norms - cultural standards prescribing how humans ought to behave
normally. This approach considers the complex realities surrounding the
concept of crime and seeks to understand how changing social, political,
psychological, and economic conditions may affect changing definitions of
crime and the form of the legal, law-enforcement, and penal responses made by
society.

These structural realities remain fluid and often contentious. For example: as
cultures change and the political environment shifts, societies may
criminalise or decriminalise certain behaviours, which directly affects the
statistical crime rates, influence the allocation of resources for the
enforcement of laws, and (re-)influence the general public opinion.

Similarly, changes in the collection and/or calculation of data on crime may
affect the public perceptions of the extent of any given "crime problem". All
such adjustments to crime statistics, allied with the experience of people in
their everyday lives, shape attitudes on the extent to which the State should
use law or social engineering to enforce or encourage any particular social
norm. Behaviour can be controlled and influenced by a society in many ways
without having to resort to the criminal justice system.

Indeed, in those cases where no clear consensus exists on a given norm, the
drafting of criminal law by the group in power to prohibit the behaviour of
another group may seem to some observers an improper limitation of the second
group's freedom, and the ordinary members of society have less respect for the
law or laws in general - whether the authorities actually enforce the disputed
law or not.

### Other definitions

Legislatures can pass laws (called _mala prohibita_ ) that define crimes
against social norms. These laws vary from time to time and from place to
place: note variations in gambling laws, for example, and the prohibition or
encouragement of duelling in history. Other crimes, called _mala in se_ ,
count as outlawed in almost all societies, (murder, theft and rape, for
example).

English criminal law and the related criminal law of Commonwealth countries
can define offences that the courts alone have developed over the years,
without any actual legislation: common law offences. The courts used the
concept of _malum in se_ to develop various common law offences.[15]

## Criminalization

Main article: Criminalization

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/64/Traitors_heads_on_old_london_bridge.jpg/220px-

Traitors_heads_on_old_london_bridge.jpg)

The spiked heads of executed criminals once adorned the gatehouse of the
medieval London Bridge.

One can view criminalization as a procedure deployed by society as a
preemptive harm-reduction device, using the threat of punishment as a
deterrent to anyone proposing to engage in the behavior causing harm. The
State becomes involved because governing entities can become convinced that
the costs of not criminalizing (through allowing the harms to continue
unabated) outweigh the costs of criminalizing it (restricting individual
liberty, for example, to minimize harm to others).

States control the process of criminalization because:

  * Even if victims recognize their own role as victims, they may not have the resources to investigate and seek legal redress for the injuries suffered: the enforcers formally appointed by the State often have better access to expertise and resources.
  * The victims may only want compensation for the injuries suffered, while remaining indifferent to a possible desire for deterrence.[16]
  * Fear of retaliation may deter victims or witnesses of crimes from taking any action. Even in policed societies, fear may inhibit from reporting incidents or from co-operating in a trial.
  * Victims, on their own, may lack the economies of scale that could allow them to administer a penal system, let alone to collect any fines levied by a court.[17] Garoupa & Klerman (2002) warn that a rent-seeking government has as its primary motivation to maximize revenue and so, if offenders have sufficient wealth, a rent-seeking government will act more aggressively than a social-welfare-maximizing government in enforcing laws against minor crimes (usually with a fixed penalty such as parking and routine traffic violations), but more laxly in enforcing laws against major crimes.
  * As a result of the crime, victims may die or become incapacitated.

## Labelling theory

Further information: Labeling theory § The "criminal"

The label of "crime" and the accompanying social stigma normally confine their
scope to those activities seen as injurious to the general population or to
the State, including some that cause serious loss or damage to individuals.
Those who apply the labels of "crime" or "criminal" intend to assert the
hegemony of a dominant population, or to reflect a consensus of condemnation
for the identified behavior and to justify any punishments prescribed by the
State (in the event that standard processing tries and convicts an accused
person of a crime).

## Natural-law theory

Justifying the State's use of force to coerce compliance with its laws has
proven a consistent theoretical problem. One of the earliest justifications
involved the theory of natural law. This posits that the nature of the world
or of human beings underlies the standards of morality or constructs them.
Thomas Aquinas wrote in the 13th century: "the rule and measure of human acts
is the reason, which is the first principle of human acts" (Aquinas, ST I-II,
Q.90, A.I). He regarded people as by nature rational beings, concluding that
it becomes morally appropriate that they should behave in a way that conforms
to their rational nature. Thus, to be valid, any law must conform to natural
law and coercing people to conform to that law is morally acceptable. In the
1760s William Blackstone (1979: 41) described the thesis:

    
    
    "This law of nature, being co-eval with mankind and dictated by God himself, is of course superior in obligation to any other. It is binding over all the globe, in all countries, and at all times: no human laws are of any validity, if contrary to this; and such of them as are valid derive all their force, and all their authority, mediately or immediately, from this original."
    

But John Austin (1790–1859), an early positivist, applied utilitarianism in
accepting the calculating nature of human beings and the existence of an
objective morality. He denied that the legal validity of a norm depends on
whether its content conforms to morality. Thus in Austinian terms, a moral
code can objectively determine what people ought to do, the law can embody
whatever norms the legislature decrees to achieve social utility, but every
individual remains free to choose what to do. Similarly, Hart (1961) saw the
law as an aspect of sovereignty, with lawmakers able to adopt any law as a
means to a moral end.

Thus the necessary and sufficient conditions for the truth of a proposition of
law simply involved internal logic and consistency, and that the state's
agents used state power with responsibility. Ronald Dworkin (2005) rejects
Hart's theory and proposes that all individuals should expect the equal
respect and concern of those who govern them as a fundamental political right.
He offers a theory of compliance overlaid by a theory of deference (the
citizen's duty to obey the law) and a theory of enforcement, which identifies
the legitimate goals of enforcement and punishment. Legislation must conform
to a theory of legitimacy, which describes the circumstances under which a
particular person or group is entitled to make law, and a theory of
legislative justice, which describes the law they are entitled or obliged to
make.

Indeed, despite everything, the majority[ _citation needed_ ] of natural-law
theorists have accepted the idea of enforcing the prevailing morality as a
primary function of the law. This view entails the problem that it makes any
moral criticism of the law impossible: if conformity with natural law forms a
necessary condition for legal validity, all valid law must, by definition,
count as morally just. Thus, on this line of reasoning, the legal validity of
a norm necessarily entails its moral justice.[ _clarification needed_ ]

One can solve this problem by granting some degree of moral relativism and
accepting that norms may evolve over time and, therefore, one can criticize
the continued enforcement of old laws in the light of the current norms.
People may find such law acceptable, but the use of State power to coerce
citizens to comply with that law lacks moral justification. More recent
conceptions of the theory characterise crime as the violation of individual
rights.

Since society considers so many rights as natural (hence the term "right")
rather than man-made, what constitutes a crime also counts as natural, in
contrast to laws (seen as man-made). Adam Smith illustrates this view, saying
that a smuggler would be an excellent citizen, "...had not the laws of his
country made that a crime which nature never meant to be so."

Natural-law theory therefore distinguishes between "criminality" (which
derives from human nature) and "illegality" (which originates with the
interests of those in power). Lawyers sometimes express the two concepts with
the phrases _malum in se_ and _malum prohibitum_ respectively. They regard a
"crime _malum in se_ " as inherently criminal; whereas a "crime _malum
prohibitum_ " (the argument goes) counts as criminal only because the law has
decreed it so.

It follows from this view that one can perform an illegal act without
committing a crime, while a criminal act could be perfectly legal. Many
Enlightenment thinkers (such as Adam Smith and the American Founding Fathers)
subscribed to this view to some extent, and it remains influential among so-
called classical liberals[ _citation needed_ ] and libertarians.[ _citation
needed_ ]

## History

Some religious communities regard sin as a crime; some may even highlight the
crime of sin very early in legendary or mythological accounts of origins -
note the tale of Adam and Eve and the theory of original sin. What one group
considers a crime may cause or ignite war or conflict. However, the earliest
known civilizations had codes of law, containing both civil and penal rules
mixed together, though not always in recorded form.

#### Ancient Near East

The Sumerians produced the earliest surviving written codes.[18] Urukagina
(reigned c. 2380 BC – c. 2360 BC, short chronology) had an early code that has
not survived; a later king, Ur-Nammu, left the earliest extant written law
system, the Code of Ur-Nammu (c. 2100 – c. 2050 BC), which prescribed a formal
system of penalties for specific cases in 57 articles. The Sumerians later
issued other codes, including the "code of Lipit-Ishtar". This code, from the
20th century BCE, contains some fifty articles, and scholars have
reconstructed it by comparing several sources.

> The Sumerian was deeply conscious of his personal rights and resented any
encroachment on them, whether by his King, his superior, or his equal. No
wonder that the Sumerians were the first to compile laws and law codes.

>

> — Kramer[19]

Successive legal codes in Babylon, including the code of Hammurabi (c. 1790
BC), reflected Mesopotamian society's belief that law derived from the will of
the gods (see Babylonian law).[20] Many states at this time functioned as
theocracies, with codes of conduct largely religious in origin or reference.
In the Sanskrit texts of Dharmaśāstra (c. 1250 BC), issues such as legal and
religious duties, code of conduct, penalties and remedies, etc. have been
discussed and forms one of the elaborate and earliest source of legal
code.[21][22]

Sir Henry Maine (1861) studied the ancient codes available in his day, and
failed to find any criminal law in the "modern" sense of the word. While
modern systems distinguish between offences against the "State" or
"community", and offences against the "individual", the so-called penal law of
ancient communities did not deal with "crimes" (Latin: _crimina_ ), but with
"wrongs" (Latin: _delicta_ ). Thus the Hellenic laws[23] treated all forms of
theft, assault, rape, and murder as private wrongs, and left action for
enforcement up to the victims or their survivors. The earliest systems seem to
have lacked formal courts.

#### Rome and its Legacy in Europe

The Romans systematized law and applied their system across the Roman Empire.
Again, the initial rules of Roman law regarded assaults as a matter of private
compensation. The most significant Roman law concept involved _dominion_.[24]
The _pater familias_ owned all the family and its property (including slaves);
the _pater_ enforced matters involving interference with any property. The
_Commentaries_ of Gaius (written between 130 and 180 AD) on the Twelve Tables
treated _furtum_ (in modern parlance: "theft") as a tort.

Similarly, assault and violent robbery involved trespass as to the _pater's_
property (so, for example, the rape of a slave could become the subject of
compensation to the _pater_ as having trespassed on his "property"), and
breach of such laws created a _vinculum juris_ (an obligation of law) that
only the payment of monetary compensation (modern "damages") could discharge.
Similarly, the consolidated Teutonic laws of the Germanic tribes,[25] included
a complex system of monetary compensations for what courts would now[update]
consider the complete [ _citation needed_ ] range of criminal offences against
the person, from murder down.

Even though Rome abandoned its Britannic provinces around 400 AD, the Germanic
mercenaries - who had largely become instrumental in enforcing Roman rule in
Britannia - acquired ownership of land there and continued to use a mixture of
Roman and Teutonic Law, with much written down under the early Anglo-Saxon
kings.[26] But only when a more centralized English monarchy emerged following
the Norman invasion, and when the kings of England attempted to assert power
over the land and its peoples, did the modern concept emerge, namely of a
crime not only as an offence against the "individual", but also as a wrong
against the "State".[27]

This idea came from common law, and the earliest conception of a criminal act
involved events of such major significance that the "State" had to usurp the
usual functions of the civil tribunals, and direct a special law or
_privilegium_ against the perpetrator. All the earliest English criminal
trials involved wholly extraordinary and arbitrary courts without any settled
law to apply, whereas the civil (delictual) law operated in a highly developed
and consistent manner (except where a king wanted to raise money by selling a
new form of writ). The development of the idea that the "State" dispenses
justice in a court only emerges in parallel with or after the emergence of the
concept of sovereignty.

In continental Europe, Roman law persisted, but with a stronger influence from
the Christian Church.[28] Coupled with the more diffuse political structure
based on smaller feudal units, various legal traditions emerged, remaining
more strongly rooted in Roman jurisprudence, but modified to meet the
prevailing political climate.

In Scandinavia the effect of Roman law did not become apparent until the 17th
century, and the courts grew out of the _things_ \- the assemblies of the
people. The people decided the cases (usually with largest freeholders
dominating). This system later gradually developed into a system with a royal
judge nominating a number of the most esteemed men of the parish as his board,
fulfilling the function of "the people" of yore.

From the Hellenic system onwards, the policy rationale for requiring the
payment of monetary compensation for wrongs committed has involved the
avoidance of feuding between clans and families.[29] If compensation could
mollify families' feelings, this would help to keep the peace. On the other
hand, the institution of oaths also played down the threat of feudal warfare.
Both in archaic Greece and in medieval Scandinavia, an accused person walked
free if he could get a sufficient number of male relatives to swear him not
guilty. (Compare the United Nations Security Council, in which the veto power
of the permanent members ensures that the organization does not become
involved in crises where it could not enforce its decisions.)

These means of restraining private feuds did not always work, and sometimes
prevented the fulfillment of justice. But in the earliest times the "state"
did not always provide an independent policing force. Thus criminal law grew
out of what 21st-century lawyers would call torts; and, in real terms, many
acts and omissions classified as crimes actually overlap with civil-law
concepts.

The development of sociological thought from the 19th century onwards prompted
some fresh views on crime and criminality, and fostered the beginnings of
criminology as a study of crime in society. Nietzsche noted a link between
crime and creativity - in _The Birth of Tragedy_ he asserted: [ _context?_ ]
"The best and brightest that man can acquire he must obtain by crime". In the
20th century Michel Foucault in _Discipline and Punish_ made a study of
criminalization as a coercive method of state control.

## Classification and categorisation

### Categorisation by type

The following classes of offences are used, or have been used, as legal terms:

  * Offence against the person[30]
  * Violent offence[31]
  * Sexual offence[31]
  * Offence against property[30]

Researchers and commentators have classified crimes into the following
categories, in addition to those above:

  * Forgery, personation and cheating[32]
  * Firearms and offensive weapons[33]
  * Offences against the State/offences against the Crown and Government[34]/political offences[35]
  * Harmful or dangerous drugs[36]
  * Offences against religion and public worship[37]
  * Offences against public justice[38]/offences against the administration of public justice[39]
  * Public order offence[40]
  * Commerce, financial markets and insolvency[41]
  * Offences against public morals and public policy[42]
  * Motor vehicle offences[43]
  * Conspiracy, incitement and attempt to commit crime[44]
  * Inchoate offence
  * Juvenile delinquency
  * Victimless crime

### Categorisation by penalty

One can categorise crimes depending on the related punishment, with sentencing
tariffs prescribed in line with the perceived seriousness of the offence. Thus
fines and noncustodial sentences may address the crimes seen as least serious,
with lengthy imprisonment or (in some jurisdictions) capital punishment
reserved for the most serious.

### Common law

Under the common law of England, crimes were classified as either treason,
felony or misdemeanour, with treason sometimes being included with the
felonies. This system was based on the perceived seriousness of the offence.
It is still used in the United States but the distinction between felony and
misdemeanour is abolished in England and Wales and Northern Ireland.

### Classification by mode of trial

The following classes of offence are based on mode of trial:

  * Indictable-only offence
  * Indictable offence
  * Hybrid offence, a.k.a. either-way offence in England and Wales
  * Summary offence, a.k.a. infraction in the US

### Classification by origin

In common law countries, crimes may be categorised into common law offences
and statutory offences. In the US, Australia and Canada (in particular), they
are divided into federal crimes and under state crimes.

### Other classifications

  * Arrestable offence

### U.S. classification

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d3/Felony_Sentences_in_State_Courts.pdf/page1-220px-

Felony_Sentences_in_State_Courts.pdf.jpg)

_Felony Sentences in State Courts_ , study by the United States Department of
Justice.

In the United States since 1930, the FBI has tabulated Uniform Crime Reports
(UCR) annually from crime data submitted by law enforcement agencies across
the United States.[45] Officials compile this data at the city, county, and
state levels into the UCR. They classify violations of laws based on common
law as Part I (index) crimes in UCR data. These are further categorized as
violent or property crimes. Part I violent crimes include murder and criminal
homicide (voluntary manslaughter), forcible rape, aggravated assault, and
robbery; while Part I property crimes include burglary, arson, larceny/theft,
and motor-vehicle theft. All other crimes count come under Part II.

For convenience, such lists usually include infractions although, in the U.S.,
they may come into the sphere not of the criminal law, but rather of the civil
law. Compare tortfeasance.

Booking arrests require detention for a time-frame ranging 1 to 24 hours.

## Reports, studies and organizations

There are several national and International organizations offering studies
and statistics about global and local crime activity, such as United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the United States of America Overseas Security
Advisory Council (OSAC) safety report or national reports generated by the
law-enforcement authorities of EU state member reported to the Europol.

## Offence in common law jurisdictions

In England and Wales, as well as in Hong Kong, the term "offence" means the
same thing as, and is interchangeable with, the term "crime",[11] They are
further split into:

  * Summary offences
  * Indictable offences

## Causes and correlates of crime

Main article: Causes and correlates of crime

Many different causes and correlates of crime have been proposed with varying
degree of empirical support. They include socioeconomic, psychological,
biological, and behavioral factors. Controversial topics include media
violence research and effects of gun politics.

Emotional state (both chronic and current) have a tremendous impact on
individual thought processes and, as a result, can be linked to criminal
activities. The positive psychology concept of Broaden and Build posits that
cognitive functioning expands when an individual is in a good-feeling
emotional state and contracts as emotional state declines.[46] In positive
emotional states an individual is able to consider more possible solutions to
problems, but in lower emotional states fewer solutions can be ascertained.
The narrowed thought-action repertoires can result in the only paths
perceptible to an individual being ones they would never use if they saw an
alternative, but if they can't conceive of the alternatives that carry less
risk they will choose one that they can see. Criminals who commit even the
most horrendous of crimes, such as mass murders, did not see another
solution.[47]

## Crimes in international law

Main article: International criminal law

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0a/Kang_Kek_Iew_%28Kaing_Guek_Eav_or_Duch%29_before_the_Extraordinary_Chambers_in_the_Courts_of_Cambodia_-_20090720.jpg/220px-

Kang_Kek_Iew_%28Kaing_Guek_Eav_or_Duch%29_before_the_Extraordinary_Chambers_in_the_Courts_of_Cambodia_-_20090720.jpg)

Kang Kek Iew before the Cambodian Genocide Tribunal on July 20, 2009

Crimes defined by treaty as crimes against international law include:

  * Crimes against peace
  * Crimes of apartheid
  * Forced disappearance
  * Genocide
  * Piracy
  * Sexual slavery
  * Slavery
  * Waging a war of aggression
  * War crimes

From the point of view of state-centric law, extraordinary procedures (usually
international courts) may prosecute such crimes. Note the role of the
International Criminal Court at The Hague in the Netherlands.

## Religion and crime

Main article: Religious law

See also: Category:Crimes in religion.

![Two peasant women are assaulting a Jewish man with pitchfork and broom. A

man wearing spectacles, tails, and a six-button waistcoat, perhaps a

pharmacist or a schoolteacher, holds another Jewish man by the throat and is

about to hit him with a stick, while a woman in a window above him throws the

wet and solid contents of a basin at him, possibly the contents of a

chamberpot. More chaos can be seen in the background, including a man with a

raised sword and riding a horse towards the

foreground.](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fd/Hep-

hep_riots.jpg/220px-Hep-hep_riots.jpg)

Religious sentiment often becomes a contributory factor of crime. In the 1819
anti-Jewish riots in Frankfurt, rioters attacked Jewish businesses and
destroyed property.

Different religious traditions may promote distinct norms of behaviour, and
these in turn may clash or harmonise with the perceived interests of a state.
Socially accepted or imposed religious morality has influenced secular
jurisdictions on issues that may otherwise concern only an individual's
conscience. Activities sometimes criminalized on religious grounds include
(for example) alcohol consumption (prohibition), abortion and stem-cell
research. In various historical and present-day societies, institutionalized
religions have established systems of earthly justice that punish crimes
against the divine will and against specific devotional, organizational and
other rules under specific codes, such as Roman Catholic canon law.

## Military jurisdictions and states of emergency

In the military sphere, authorities can prosecute both regular crimes and
specific acts (such as mutiny or desertion) under martial-law codes that
either supplant or extend civil codes in times of (for example) war.

Many constitutions contain provisions to curtail freedoms and criminalize
otherwise tolerated behaviors under a state of emergency in the event of war,
natural disaster or civil unrest. Undesired activities at such times may
include assembly in the streets, violation of curfew, or possession of
firearms.

## Employee crime

Main article: Occupational crime

Two common types of employee crime exist: embezzlement and wage theft.

The complexity and anonymity of computer systems may help criminal employees
camouflage their operations. The victims of the most costly scams include
banks, brokerage houses, insurance companies, and other large financial
institutions.[48]

In the United States, it is estimated that workers are not paid at least $19
billion every year in overtime[49] and that in total $40 billion to $60
billion are lost annually due to all forms of wage theft.[50] This compares to
national annual losses of $340 million due to robbery, $4.1 billion due to
burglary, $5.3 billion due to larceny, and $3.8 billion due to auto theft in
2012.[51] In Singapore, as in the United States, wage theft was found to be
widespread and severe. In a 2014 survey it was found that as many as one-third
of low wage male foreign workers in Singapore, or about 130,000, were affected
by wage theft from partial to full denial of pay.[52]

## See also

  * ![icon](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/42/Social_sciences.svg/32px-Social_sciences.svg.png)Society portal
  * ![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/9a/Johnny-automatic-scales-of-justice.svg/32px-Johnny-automatic-scales-of-justice.svg.png)Law portal

  * Aggression

  * Crime displacement
  * Crime science
  * Federal Crime
  * Justice
  * Law and order (politics)
  * Malice (law)
  * Category:Age of criminal responsibility

## Notes

  1. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ "Crime". _Oxford English Dictionary Second Edition on CD-ROM_. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2009.
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Farmer, Lindsay: "Crime, definitions of", in Cane and Conoghan (editors), _The New Oxford Companion to Law_ , Oxford University Press, 2008 (ISBN 978-0-19-929054-3), p. 263 (Google Books).
  3. **^** In the United Kingdom, for instance, the definitions provided by section 243(2) of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 and by the Schedule to the Prevention of Crimes Act 1871.
  4. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Elizabeth A. Martin (2003). _Oxford Dictionary of Law_ (7 ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-860756-4.
  5. **^** Easton, Mark (17 June 2010). "What is crime?". _BBC News_. Archived from the original on 27 February 2013. Retrieved 10 June 2013.
  6. **^** _People v. Frazier_ , 173 Cal. App. 4th 613 (2009). In this case, the California Court of Appeal explained: "Despite the physical ability to commit vicious and violent acts, dogs do not possess the legal ability to commit crimes."
  7. **^** Quinney, Richard, "Structural Characteristics, Population Areas, and Crime Rates in the United States," _The Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology and Police Science_ , 57(1), pp. 45–52
  8. **^** Ernest Klein, _Klein's Comprehensive Etymological Dictionary of the English Language_ Archived 2016-03-22 at the Wayback Machine
  9. **^** Bakaoukas, Michael. "The conceptualisation of 'Crime' in Classical Greek Antiquity: From the ancient Greek 'crime' (krima) as an intellectual error to the christian 'crime' (crimen) as a moral sin." ERCES ( European and International research group on crime, Social Philosophy and Ethics). 2005. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2011-09-28. Retrieved 2011-06-27.CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)
  10. **^** _Seaman v Burley_ [1896] 2 QB, per Lord Esher MR at 346
  11. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ Glanville Williams, _Learning the Law_ , Eleventh Edition, Stevens, 1982, p. 3
  12. **^** Chapter 1 of "Smith and Hogan's Criminal Law" (13th Ed by Ormerod) discusses the various proposed definitions of "crime" in more detail.
  13. **^** The Prevention of Crime Act 1908, section 10(6) and Schedule
  14. **^** The Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, section 243(2) Archived 2012-01-11 at the Wayback Machine
  15. **^** _Canadian Law Dictionary_ , John A. Yogis, Q.C., Barrons: 2003
  16. **^** See Polinsky  & Shavell (1997) on the fundamental divergence between the private and the social motivation for using the legal system.
  17. **^** See Polinsky (1980) on the enforcement of fines
  18. **^** Oppenheim (1964)
  19. **^** Kramer (1971: 4)
  20. **^** Driver and Mills (1952–55) and Skaist (1994)
  21. **^** Anuradha Jaiswal, _Criminal Justice Tenets of Manusmriti – A Critique of the Ancient Hindu Code_
  22. **^** Olivelle, Patrick. 2004. _The Law Code of Manu_. New York: Oxford UP.
  23. **^** Gagarin: 1986; and Garner: 1987
  24. **^** Daube: 1969
  25. **^** Guterman: 1990
  26. **^** Attenborough: 1963
  27. **^** Kern: 1948; Blythe: 1992; and Pennington: 1993
  28. **^** Vinogradoff (1909); Tierney: 1964, 1979
  29. **^** The concept of the _pater familias_ acted as a unifying factor in extended kin groups, and the later practice of _wergild_ functioned in this context. [ _citation needed_ ]
  30. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ For example, by the Visiting Forces Act 1952
  31. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ For example, by section 31(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991, and by the Criminal Justice Act 2003
  32. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 22
  33. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 24
  34. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 25
  35. **^** E.g. _Card, Cross and Jones: Criminal Law_ , 12th ed, 1992, chapter 17
  36. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 26
  37. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 27
  38. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 28
  39. **^** E.g. _Card, Cross and Jones: Criminal Law_ , 12th ed, 1992, chapter 16
  40. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 29
  41. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 30
  42. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 31
  43. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 32
  44. **^** E.g. _Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice_ , 1999, chapter 33
  45. **^** "FBI: Uniform Crime Reports". Fbi.gov. Archived from the original on 2004-10-24. Retrieved 2013-02-28.
  46. **^** Fredrickson, B.L. (2005). Positive Emotions broaden the scope of attention and though-action repertoires. Cognition and Emotion, 19: 313–332.
  47. **^** Baumeister, R.F. (2012). Human Evil: The myth of pure evil and the true causes of violence. In A.P. Association, M. Mikulincer,  & P.R. Shaver (Eds.), The social psychology of morality: Exploring the causes of good and evil (pp. 367–380). Washington, DC
  48. **^** Sara Baase, _A Gift of Fire: Social, Legal, and Ethical Issues for Computing and The Internet_. Third Ed. "Employee Crime" (2008)
  49. **^** Park, Crystal (21 May 2014). "Wage Theft in America: How the Rich get Richer While the Poor Stay Poor". _Voice of Russia_. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2014.
  50. **^** Michael De Groote, Michael De Groote (24 June 2014). "Wage theft: How employers steal millions from workers every week". Desert News National. Archived from the original on 2 July 2014. Retrieved July 1, 2014.
  51. **^** "Crime in the United States 2012, Table 23". _Uniform Crime Reports_. Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on 2016-06-05.
  52. **^** Choo, Irene (1 September 2014). "Cheap foreign labour to spur economic growth – think deeper and harder". _The Online Citizen_. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014.

## References

  * Aquinas, Thomas. (1988). _On Law, Morality and Politics_. 2nd edition. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co. ISBN 0-87220-663-7
  * Attenborough, F.L. (ed. and trans.) (1922). _The Laws of the Earliest English Kings_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Reprint March 2006. The Lawbook Exchange, Ltd. ISBN 1-58477-583-1
  * Blackstone, William. (1765–1769). _Commentaries on the Law of England: A Facsimile of the First Edition of 1765–1769, Vol. 1_. (1979). Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-05538-8
  * Blythe, James M. (1992). _Ideal Government and the Mixed Constitution in the Middle Ages_. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03167-3
  * Cohen, Stanley (1985). _Visions of Social Control: Crime, Punishment, and Classification_. Polity Press. ISBN 0-7456-0021-2
  * Daube, David. (1969). _Roman Law: Linguistic, Social and Philosophical Aspects_. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 0-85224-051-1
  * Driver, G.R. & Mills, John C. (1952–1955). _The Babylonian Laws_. 2 Vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-825110-6
  * Dworkin, Ronald. (2005). _Taking Rights Seriously_. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-86711-4
  * Foucault, Michel (1975). _Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison_ , New York: Random House.
  * Gagarin, Michael (1989) [1986]. _Early Greek Law_ (Reprint ed.). Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-06602-1.
  * Garner, Richard. (1987). _Law and Society in Classical Athens_. London: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0-312-00856-2
  * Garoupa, Nuno & Klerman, Daniel. (2002). "Optimal Law Enforcement with a Rent-Seeking Government". _American Law and Economics Review_ Vol. 4, No. 1. pp. 116–140.
  * Guterman, Simeon L. (1990). _The Principle of the Personality of Law in the Germanic Kingdoms of Western Europe from the Fifth to the Eleventh Century_. New York: P. Lang. ISBN 0-8204-0731-3
  * Hart, H.L.A. (1961). _The Concept of Law_. 2nd revised edition (1997). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-876123-6
  * Hart, H.L.A. (1972). _Law, Liberty and Morality_. Stanford: Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-0154-7
  * Kern, Fritz. (1948). _Kingship and Law in the Middle Ages_. Reprint edition (1985), Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.
  * Kramer, Samuel Noah. (1971). _The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and Character_. Chicago: University of Chicago. ISBN 0-226-45238-7
  * Maine, Henry Sumner. (1861). _Ancient Law: Its Connection with the Early History of Society, and Its Relation to Modern Ideas_. Reprint edition (1986). Tucson: University of Arizona Press. ISBN 0-8165-1006-7
  * Oppenheim, A. Leo (and Reiner, Erica as editor). (1964). _Ancient Mesopotamia: Portrait of a Dead Civilization_. Revised edition (September 15, 1977). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-63187-7
  * Pennington, Kenneth. (1993). _The Prince and the Law, 1200–1600: Sovereignty and Rights in the Western Legal Tradition_. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-07995-7
  * Polinsky, A. Mitchell. (1980). "Private versus Public Enforcement of Fines". _The Journal of Legal Studies_ , Vol. IX, No. 1, (January), pp. 105–127.
  * Polinsky, A. Mitchell & Shavell, Steven. (1997). _On the Disutility and Discounting of Imprisonment and the Theory of Deterrence_ , NBER Working Papers 6259, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  * Skaist, Aaron Jacob. (1994). _The Old Babylonian Loan Contract: Its History and Geography_. Ramat Gan, Israel: Bar-Ilan University Press. ISBN 965-226-161-0
  * Théry, Julien. (2011). "Atrocitas/enormitas. Esquisse pour une histoire de la catégorie de 'crime énorme' du Moyen Âge à l'époque moderne", Clio@Themis, Revue électronique d'histoire du droit, n. 4
  * Tierney, Brian. (1979). _Church Law and Constitutional Thought in the Middle Ages_. London: Variorum Reprints. ISBN 0-86078-036-8
  * Tierney, Brian (1988) [1964]. _The Crisis of Church and State, 1050–1300: with selected documents_ (Reprint ed.). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-0-8020-6701-2.
  * Vinogradoff, Paul. (1909). _Roman Law in Medieval Europe_. Reprint edition (2004). Kessinger Publishing Co. ISBN 1-4179-4909-0

## External links

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fa/Wikiquote-

logo.svg/34px-Wikiquote-logo.svg.png) | Wikiquote has quotations related to:
_**Crime**_  
\---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/9/99/Wiktionary-logo-

en-v2.svg/40px-Wiktionary-logo-en-v2.svg.png) | Look up _**crime**_ in
Wiktionary, the free dictionary.  
\---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/30px-

Commons-logo.svg.png) | Wikimedia Commons has media related to _**Crime**_.  
\---|---  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/dd/Wikivoyage-

Logo-v3-icon.svg/40px-Wikivoyage-Logo-v3-icon.svg.png) | Wikivoyage has travel
information for _**crime**_.  
\---|---

  * Crime at Curlie

Articles Related to Crime

* * *

|

  * v
  * t
  * e

Types of crime

* * *

_Note: Crimes vary byjurisdiction. Not all types are listed here._

Classes|

  * Infraction
  * Misdemeanor
  * Felony
  * Summary
  * Indictable
  * Hybrid

|

![Scales of

Justice](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0e/Scale_of_justice_2.svg/100px-

Scale_of_justice_2.svg.png)

Against the person|

  * Assault
  * Battery
  * Extortion
  * Harassment
  * Kidnapping
  * Identity theft
  * Manslaughter
    * corporate
  * Murder
  * Rape
  * Robbery
  * Sexual assault

Against property|

  * Arson
  * Blackmail
  * Burglary
  * Deception
  * Embezzlement
  * False pretenses
  * Fraud
  * Handling
  * Larceny
  * Theft
  * Vandalism

Against public order|

  * Drug possession
  * Public order
  * Breach of the peace

Against the state|

  * Tax evasion
  * Espionage
  * Treason
  * High treason

Against justice|

  * Bribery
  * Misprision of felony
  * Obstruction
  * Perjury
  * Malfeasance in office

Inchoate offenses|

  * Accessory
  * Attempt
  * Conspiracy
  * Incitement
  * Encouraging or assisting a crime
  * Solicitation
  * Common purpose

  * WikiSource

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikiquote
  * Wikinews

  * v

  * t
  * e

International criminal law

* * *

Sources|

  * Customary international law
  * Peremptory norm
  * Hague Conventions
  * Geneva Conventions
  * Nuremberg Charter
  * Nuremberg principles
  * United Nations Charter
  * Genocide Convention
  * Convention Against Torture
  * Rome Statute

Crimes against  
international law

|

  * Crimes against humanity
  * Crime against peace
  * Crime of apartheid
  * Genocide
  * Piracy
  * Slave trading
  * War crime
  * War of aggression

International courts  
(in order of foundation)

|

  * International Military Tribunal (Nuremberg Trials)
  * International Military Tribunal for the Far East
  * International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
  * International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
  * Special Court for Sierra Leone
  * International Criminal Court
  * Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia
  * Special Panels of the Dili District Court
  * Special Tribunal for Lebanon
  * Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals

History|

  * List of war crimes
  * List of convicted war criminals
  * Leipzig War Crimes Trials

Related concepts|

  * Command responsibility
  * Superior orders
  * Joint criminal enterprise
  * Law of war
  * Universal jurisdiction
  * Non-combatant

  * v

  * t
  * e

Law

* * *

Core subjects|

  * Administrative law
  * Civil law
  * Constitutional law
  * Contract
  * Criminal law
  * Deed
  * Equity
  * Evidence
  * International law
  * Law of obligations
  * Procedure
    * Civil
    * Criminal
  * Property law
  * Public law
  * Restitution
  * Statutory law
  * Tort

Other subjects|

  * Agricultural law
  * Aviation law
  * Banking law
  * Bankruptcy
  * Commercial law
  * Competition law
  * Conflict of laws
  * Construction law
  * Consumer protection
  * Corporate law
  * Cyberlaw
  * Election law
  * Energy law
  * Entertainment law
  * Environmental law
  * Family law
  * Financial law
  * Financial regulation
  * Health law
  * History of the legal profession
  * History of the American legal profession
  * Immigration law
  * Intellectual property
  * International criminal law
  * International human rights
  * International slavery laws
  * Labour
  * Law of war
  * Legal archaeology
  * Legal fiction
  * Maritime law
  * Media law
  * Military law
  * Probate
    * Estate
    * Will and testament
  * Product liability
  * Public international law
  * Space law
  * Sports law
  * Tax law
  * Transport law
  * Trust law
  * Women in law

Sources of law|

  * Charter
  * Constitution
  * Custom
  * Divine right
    * Divine law
  * Human rights
  * Natural law
    * Natural and legal rights
  * Case law
    * Precedent

Law making|

  * Ballot measure
  * Codification
  * Decree
    * Edict
    * Executive order
    * Proclamation
  * Legislation
    * Delegated legislation
    * Regulation
    * Rulemaking
  * Promulgation
  * Repeal
  * Treaty
  * Statutory law
    * Statute
    * Act of Parliament
    * Act of Congress (US)

Legal systems|

  * Civil law
  * Common law
  * Chinese law
  * Legal pluralism
  * Religious law
    * Canon law
    * Hindu law
    * Jain law
    * Jewish law
    * Sharia
  * Roman law
  * Socialist law
  * Statutory law
  * Xeer
  * Yassa

Legal theory|

  * Critical legal studies
  * Comparative law
  * Feminist
  * Law and economics
  * Legal formalism
  * History
  * International legal theory
  * Principle of legality
  * Rule of law
  * Sociology

Jurisprudence|

  * Adjudication
  * Administration of justice
  * Criminal justice
  * Court-martial
  * Dispute resolution
  * Fiqh
  * Lawsuit/Litigation
  * Legal opinion
  * Legal remedy
  * Judge
    * Justice of the peace
    * Magistrate
  * Judgment
  * Judicial review
  * Jurisdiction
  * Jury
  * Justice
  * Practice of law
    * Attorney
    * Barrister
    * Counsel
    * Lawyer
    * Legal representation
    * Prosecutor
    * Solicitor
  * Question of fact
  * Question of law
  * Trial
  * Trial advocacy
  * Trier of fact
  * Verdict

Legal institutions|

  * Bureaucracy
  * The bar
  * The bench
  * Civil society
  * Court
  * Election commission
  * Executive
  * Judiciary
  * Law enforcement
  * Legal education
    * Law school
  * Legislature
  * Military
  * Police
  * Political party
  * Tribunal

  * **Category**

  * **Index**
  * **Outline**
  * **Portal**

  * v

  * t
  * e

Criminal procedure (investigation)

* * *

Criminal investigation|

  * _Arguido_
  * Arrest
  * Arrest warrant
  * Consent search
  * Exigent circumstance
  * Knock-and-announce
  * Miranda warning
  * Pretextual stop
  * Probable cause
  * Search and seizure
  * Search of persons
  * Search warrant
  * Suspect
  * Terry stop
  * Reasonable suspicion
  * Detention
  * Right to silence

Criminal prosecution|

  * Adversarial system
  * Bail
  * Bill of attainder
  * Criminal jurisdiction
  * Deferred prosecution agreement
  * Ex post facto law
  * Extradition
  * Grand jury
  * _Habeas corpus_
  * Indictment
  * Inquisitorial system
  * _Nolle prosequi_
  * Precognition
  * Statute of limitations

Charges and pleas|

  * Alford plea
  * Arraignment
  * Information
  * Indictment
  * _Nolo contendere_
  * Plea
  * Plea bargain
  * Peremptory plea
  * Presentence investigation

Related areas|

  * Criminal defenses
  * Criminal law
  * Evidence
  * Legal abuse

  * Criminal justice portal

  * Law portal

  * Wiktionary

  * Wikibooks
  * Wikiquote
  * WikiSource
  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikinews
  * Wikiversity

  * ![Scale of justice 2.svg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/0/0e/Scale_of_justice_2.svg/21px-Scale_of_justice_2.svg.png)Criminal justice portal

Authority control ![Edit this at

Wikidata](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/7/73/Blue_pencil.svg/10px-

Blue_pencil.svg.png)|

  * GND: 4062653-2
  * LCCN: sh85033993
  * NARA: 10638047
  * NDL: 00562960

\---|---

![](//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:CentralAutoLogin/start?type=1x1)

Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Crime&oldid=899958359"

Categories:

  * Crime
  * Criminal law
  * Criminology
  * Morality
  * Main topic articles

Hidden categories:

  * Webarchive template wayback links
  * CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
  * All articles with unsourced statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from July 2009
  * Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
  * Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
  * Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010
  * Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2009
  * Articles with unsourced statements from August 2008
  * Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008
  * All articles containing potentially dated statements
  * Articles with unsourced statements from February 2009
  * Wikipedia articles needing context from November 2016
  * Commons category link from Wikidata
  * Articles with Curlie links
  * Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers
  * Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers

## Navigation menu

### Personal tools

  * Not logged in
  * Talk
  * Contributions
  * Create account
  * Log in

### Namespaces

  * Article
  * Talk

### Variants

### Views

  * Read
  * View source
  * View history

### More

### Search

### Navigation

  * Main page
  * Contents
  * Featured content
  * Current events
  * Random article
  * Donate to Wikipedia
  * Wikipedia store

### Interaction

  * Help
  * About Wikipedia
  * Community portal
  * Recent changes
  * Contact page

### Tools

  * What links here
  * Related changes
  * Upload file
  * Special pages
  * Permanent link
  * Page information
  * Wikidata item
  * Cite this page

### In other projects

  * Wikimedia Commons
  * Wikiquote
  * Wikivoyage

### Print/export

  * Create a book
  * Download as PDF
  * Printable version

### Languages

  * Afrikaans
  * العربية
  * Azərbaycanca
  * বাংলা
  * Bân-lâm-gú
  * Беларуская
  * Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
  * भोजपुरी
  * Български
  * Bosanski
  * Brezhoneg
  * Català
  * Чӑвашла
  * Čeština
  * Cymraeg
  * Deutsch
  * Eesti
  * Ελληνικά
  * Español
  * Esperanto
  * Euskara
  * فارسی
  * Føroyskt
  * Français
  * Frysk
  * Gaeilge
  * Galego
  * 한국어
  * हिन्दी
  * Hrvatski
  * Ido
  * Bahasa Indonesia
  * Íslenska
  * Italiano
  * עברית
  * Jawa
  * ಕನ್ನಡ
  * ქართული
  * Қазақша
  * Кыргызча
  * ລາວ
  * Latina
  * Latviešu
  * Limburgs
  * Magyar
  * Македонски
  * मराठी
  * Bahasa Melayu
  * Mirandés
  * မြန်မာဘာသာ
  * Nederlands
  * 日本語
  * Occitan
  * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
  * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
  * Patois
  * Polski
  * Português
  * Română
  * Runa Simi
  * Русский
  * Scots
  * සිංහල
  * Simple English
  * Slovenčina
  * Slovenščina
  * Soomaaliga
  * کوردی
  * Српски / srpski
  * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
  * Suomi
  * Svenska
  * Tagalog
  * தமிழ்
  * Татарча/tatarça
  * తెలుగు
  * ไทย
  * Тоҷикӣ
  * Türkçe
  * Українська
  * اردو
  * Tiếng Việt
  * 文言
  * Winaray
  * ייִדיש
  * 粵語
  * 中文

Edit links

  * This page was last edited on 2 June 2019, at 14:24 (UTC).
  * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

  * Privacy policy

  * About Wikipedia
  * Disclaimers
  * Contact Wikipedia
  * Developers
  * Cookie statement
  * Mobile view

  * ![Wikimedia Foundation](/static/images/wikimedia-button.png)

  * ![Powered by MediaWiki](/static/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

