
        
                  * Dictionary.com
          * Thesaurus.com
          * Everything After Z
            * Word of the Day
            * Video
            * Word Facts
            * Grammar
            * Crossword Solver
            * Daily Crossword
          * All The Words
            * Slang
            * Emoji
            * Gender & Sexuality
            * Acronyms
        
          * Dictionary.com
          * Thesaurus.com
        

Try Our Apps

![Dictionary.com](https://www.dictionary.com/assets/dictionary_logo_white-90c1e2eaf84c6abcb80d08d6eb0b6c60.svg)

definitions

Search

        
                  * synonyms
        

# miracle

[ mir-uh-kuh l ]SHOW IPA

/ ˈmɪr ə kəl /PHONETIC RESPELLING

EXAMPLES|WORD ORIGIN

SEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR miracle ON THESAURUS.COM

* * *

### noun

an effect or extraordinary event in the physical world that surpasses all
known human or natural powers and is ascribed to a supernatural cause.

such an effect or event manifesting or considered as a work of God.

a wonder; marvel.

a wonderful or surpassing example of some quality: a miracle of modern
acoustics.

miracle play.

## RELATED CONTENT

Light Up Your Language For The Festival Of LightsRead more in this article
about some frequently asked questions and fun facts related to our
definitions.

READ MORE

divine interventionRead more in this article about some frequently asked
questions and fun facts related to our definitions.

READ MORE

## RELATED WORDS

phenomenon, revelation, rarity, surprise, wonder, marvel, thaumaturgy,
sensation, prodigy, stunner, portent, unusualness

## Nearby words

        
                  1. mirabelle, 
          2. mirabile dictu, 
          3. mirabilia, 
          4. mirabilite, 
          5. miracidium, 
          6. miracle drug, 
          7. miracle fruit, 
          8. miracle man, 
          9. miracle mile, 
          10. miracle of st. mark, the
        

## Origin of miracle

1125–75; Middle English miracle, miracul (< Old French miracle) < Latin
mīrāculum, equivalent to mīrā(rī) to wonder at + -culum -cle2

Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, ©
Random House, Inc. 2019

## Examples from the Web for miracle

        
                  * Just two young kids experiencing the panic, pain, and then the miracle, of new birth.
        

Jesus Wasn’t Born Rich. Think About It.|Gene Robinson|December 25, 2014|DAILY
BEAST

        
                  * And its crew had fought so hard for a Christmastime miracle that was not to be.
        

'Please Don't Die!': The Frantic Battle to Save Murdered Cops|Michael
Daly|December 22, 2014|DAILY BEAST

        
                  * A Manhattan window washer somehow survived a 47-story fall back in 2007, but such a miracle was not likely to repeat itself.
        

Rescue at One World Trade Center|Michael Daly|November 13, 2014|DAILY BEAST

        
                  * Adult Swim airs ‘In Search of Miracle Man,’ its follow up to ‘Too Many Cooks,’ the deranged late-night comedy clip gone viral.
        

There Are More 'Too Many Cooks' Where That First Fever Dream Came From|Kevin
Fallon|November 11, 2014|DAILY BEAST

        
                  * There was so much back and forth, but somehow by a miracle everything went perfectly.
        

How Aidy Bryant Stealthily Became Your Favorite ‘Saturday Night Live’
Star|Kevin Fallon|October 31, 2014|DAILY BEAST

        
                  * And of course they all have to gather round and watch me close, as if I was about to pull some miracle.
        

The House of Torchy|Sewell Ford

        
                  * One man alone had worked the miracle and as his enemies had truly said his presence was worth ten thousand men.
        

The Tree of Appomattox|Joseph A. Altsheler

        
                  * Can you realise the miracle, liberty-loving reader, that passes in the mind of a man who thus suddenly realises his freedom?
        

Caught by the Turks|Francis Yeats-Brown

        
                  * And then, miracle of miracles, her face was crushed down against him, and he felt her sweet warm touch.
        

Kazan|James Oliver Curwood

        
                  * Don Pablo and the missionary were almost inclined to believe in a miracle so extraordinary did the fact appear to them.
        

The Trail-Hunter|Gustave Aimard

**SEE MORE EXAMPLES** **SEE FEWER EXAMPLES**



Explore Dictionary.com

        
                  * ![Quotes For Success To Push You Across The Finish Line](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/1000x700-quotes-for-success-1-150x150.jpg)
        

Quotes For Success To Push You Across The Finish Line

        
                  * ![15 Quotes From Women Writers Who Shake Things Up](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/default_logo_800x800-150x150.jpg)
        

15 Quotes From Women Writers Who Shake Things Up

        
                  * ![These Songs Helped Us Learn How To Spell](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-songs-spelling-1-150x150.jpg)
        

These Songs Helped Us Learn How To Spell

        
                  * ![Empathy vs. Sympathy: Which Word To Use And When](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/1000x700-empathy-vs-sympathy-150x150.jpg)
        

Empathy vs. Sympathy: Which Word To Use And When

        
                  * ![Words To Help Explain Relationships In The 2010s](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/1000x700-relationships-1-150x150.jpg)
        

Words To Help Explain Relationships In The 2010s

        
                  * ![Put A Pin In Your Persiflage And Play This Week’s Quiz](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/wotd_quiz-800x800-150x150.jpg)
        

Put A Pin In Your Persiflage And Play This Week’s Quiz

## British Dictionary definitions for miracle

## miracle

/ (ˈmɪrəkəl) /

* * *

### noun

an event that is contrary to the established laws of nature and attributed to
a supernatural cause

any amazing or wonderful event

a person or thing that is a marvellous example of somethingthe bridge was a
miracle of engineering

short for miracle play

(modifier) being or seeming a miraclea miracle cure

## Word Origin for miracle

C12: from Latin mīrāculum, from mīrārī to wonder at

Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition ©
William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 © HarperCollins Publishers 1998,
2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012

## Word Origin and History for miracle

## miracle

* * *

n.

mid-12c., "a wondrous work of God," from Old French miracle (11c.) "miracle,
story of a miracle, miracle play," from Latin miraculum "object of wonder" (in
Church Latin, "marvelous event caused by God"), from mirari "to wonder at,
marvel, be astonished," figuratively "to regard, esteem," from mirus
"wonderful, astonishing, amazing," earlier _smeiros, from PIE_ smei- "to
smile, laugh" (cf. Sanskrit smerah "smiling," Greek meidan "to smile," Old
Church Slavonic smejo "to laugh;" see smile (v.)).

From mid-13c. as "extraordinary or remarkable feat," without regard to deity.
Replaced Old English wundortacen, wundorweorc. The Greek words rendered as
miracle in the English bibles were semeion "sign," teras "wonder," and dynamis
"power," in Vulgate translated respectively as signum, prodigium, and virtus.
The Latin word is the source of Spanish milagro, Italian miracolo.

Online Etymology Dictionary, © 2010 Douglas Harper

Others Are Reading

        
                  * ![Have You Ever Mixed Up These Misunderstood Emoji?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-misunderstood-emoji-1-150x150.jpg)
        

Have You Ever Mixed Up These Misunderstood Emoji?

        
                  * ![What’s The Difference Between “i.e.” And “e.g.”?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/ie-eg-video_v3-1000x700-150x150.jpg)
        

What’s The Difference Between “i.e.” And “e.g.”?

WORD OF THE DAY

bastion _noun_ | [bas-chuhn, -tee-uhn]SEE DEFINITION

        
                  * ![Redefine Black: Why Dictionary.com Is Updating Its Definition](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/1000x700-redefine-black-v2-150x150.jpg)
        

Redefine Black: Why Dictionary.com Is Updating Its Definition

        
                  * ![Why Is “Bisexual” Such A Charged Word In 2019?](https://www.dictionary.com/e/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/1000x700-bisexual-150x150.jpg)
        

Why Is “Bisexual” Such A Charged Word In 2019?

        
                  * Browse the Dictionary:
          * #
          * A
          * B
          * C
          * D
          * E
          * F
          * G
          * H
          * I
          * J
          * K
          * L
          * M
          * N
          * O
          * P
          * Q
          * R
          * S
          * T
          * U
          * V
          * W
          * X
          * Y
          * Z
          * Browse by Category:
          * Slang
          * Emoji
          * Acronyms
          * Pop Culture
          * More
        
          * About
          * Careers
          * Contact Us
          * Cookies, Terms, & Privacy
        

© 2019 Dictionary.com, LLC

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[ v]: View this template _[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]:
2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200_ [2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
_[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200_
[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
*[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:44:44+0200
  *[2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200]: 2019-06-07T01:38:28+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:52:10+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:48:31+0200
  *[2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200]: 2019-06-06T21:39:49+0200

