

X

## Notice

Your privacy is important to us. We have updated our privacy policy to better
explain how we use data on this site. Read it here

Stay Connected:

  * Editions 
    * National
    * PunditFact
    * Health Check
    * Facebook Hoaxes
    * States 
    * California
    * Florida
    * Illinois
    * Missouri
    * New Hampshire
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * Pennsylvania
    * Texas
    * Virginia
    * West Virginia
    * Vermont
    * Wisconsin
  * Truth-O-MeterTM
    * All
    * By subject
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
    * No Flip
    * Half Flip
    * Full Flop
  * People 
    * Donald Trump
    * Mike Pence
    * Barack Obama
    * Chain E-mails
    * Other people and groups
  * Promises 
    * Trump-O-Meter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Not yet rated
    * In the Works
    * Stalled
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
    * Obameter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
  * Pants On Fire
  * About Us 
    * Our Process
    * Our Staff
    * Who Pays for Politifact
    * Suggest a Fact Check
  * Donate

  * **Oregon Edition**

  * The Oregon Truth-O-Meter 
    * All
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
  * Promises
  * Articles
  * People
  * Elections
  * Subjects

![True](https://static.politifact.com/rulings/tom-true.png)

![Kennemer](https://static.politifact.com/politifact/mugs/Kennemer.JPG)

"We just don't want to get to be like Louisiana, where you have drive-up
daiquiri shops."

\-- Bill Kennemer on Tuesday, September 11th, 2012 in a news story

# Are there daiquiri drive-thrus in Louisiana?

By Janie Har on Thursday, September 13th, 2012 at 5:06 p.m.

Oregon is a control state. Not only does the state regulate the consumption of
all alcohol, but the state buys, stores and sells distilled spirits to
retailers and consumers.

That may change, with rumblings Thursday of a citizens' initiative to loosen
our uptight liquor laws if lawmakers don't in 2013. Some legislators appeared
reluctant to follow Washington state in privatizing liquor sales, as reported
in a three-part series published in The Oregonian this week. State Rep. Bill
Kennemer told a reporter: "We just don't want to get to be like Louisiana,
where you have drive-up daiquiri shops."

PolitiFact Oregon wondered if perhaps Kennemer had first-hand knowledge to
back up his bold statement. Because anyone who's grown up on the West Coast
and has not traveled to the South knows there's no such thing as ordering a
cocktail to go, especially from behind the wheel. (PolitiFact Oregon knows
someone who knows someone who tried to order a takeaway gin-and-tonic from a
San Francisco bar but was rejected, even though the person was on foot!)

It turns out, Kennemer did have direct knowledge.

In an interview, he explained he was driving around the New Orleans area with
his wife, Cherie, one recent summer and they kept spotting these signs for
daiquiris. The signs were attached to buildings with drive-thru windows.
Blended frozen daiquiris are made with rum, lime juice and sweetener and have
the consistency of iced smoothies. They come in many fruity flavors, plus
chocolate.

"So after seeing this and being tempted multiple times," he said, "and
thinking what in the world could this possibly be, we drove into one and ended
up ordering daiquiris."

PolitiFact Oregon: Did you order the drinks and then drive off?

Kennemer (small voice): "I'm afraid we did."

So there's your evidence. Still, we understand that readers may want legal
proof of proofed drinks to-go by vehicle, other than the word of a visiting
legislator. For that, we contacted Jacques Berry, a spokesman for the
Louisiana lieutenant governor's office.

Berry couldn't tell us how many such drive-thrus dot the South Louisiana
landscape, but he verified that a person doesn't usually have to go far to
find one. For locals, it's a popular frozen treat on a Friday afternoon. "It's
not as much of a late-night thing," he said.

And why the daiquiri, in particular? Well, Berry thinks it has to do with New
Orleans bartenders mixing the ingredients that were plentiful and on hand, in
this case, fresh fruit, rum and ice. The drinks caught on.

Donnie Silva, owner of Big Easy Bachelor Parties in New Orleans, says he
thinks the blended drinks are popular because of the climate. He was in Las
Vegas recently when he says, "I really wanted a daiquiri. I guess it's just
the heat, we really don't have a winter. Fifteen of the last 25 Christmases
I've been in shorts and a T-shirt."

Which is an utterly foreign concept to Oregonians. As foreign as the daiquiri
drive-thru.

(Technically, Louisiana does not allow open containers in vehicles. The way it
works is that an attendant hands you a drink and a straw and what you do with
those two objects is up to you. Also, in some states, you can buy packaged
liquor and beer through a drive-thru window. )

We realize Kennemer is citing an extreme example, and that's fine, but we
should also remind readers that loosening our liquor laws won't necessarily
turn us into Louisiana. California has liquor stores that any kid can enter to
buy a pack of gum. And still you can't get a decent frozen daiquiri to go, by
car, or a gin and tonic, by foot.

We rate the statement True.

Advertisement

### About this statement:

Published: Thursday, September 13th, 2012 at 5:06 p.m.

Researched by: Janie Har

Edited by: Bruce Hammond

Subjects: Alcohol

### Sources:

The Oregonian, "Pinot politics: Oregon lawmakers take cautious approach to
liberalizing liquor laws," Sept. 11, 2012  
USA Today, "Concern over drive-up alcohol sales spurs efforts at ban," July
10, 2012  
New York Times, "There You Go! Now Drive Safe, You Hear?," July 2, 2011  
The Times-Picayune, "Eliminate straw-sized loophole in Louisiana's open
container law: An editorial," April 30, 2010  
Interview with Bill Kennemer, Sept. 11, 2012  
Interview with Donnie Silva, owner, Big Easy Bachelor Parties, Sept. 13, 2012  
Interview with Jacques Berry -- "as in strawberry daiquiri" -- spokesman,
Office of Lt. Governor, Louisiana, Sept. 13, 2012

### How to contact us

We want to hear your suggestions and comments. Email the Truth-O-Meter with
feedback and with claims you'd like to see checked. If you send us a comment,
we'll assume you don't mind us publishing it unless you tell us otherwise.

### Browse The Oregon Truth-O-Meter

  * See all False rulings
  * See all Pants on Fire rulings
  * See all rulings on the state budget

Advertisement

### Subscribe

#### Keep up to date with PolitiFact Oregon

  * Sign up for our weekly email newsletter from Editor Angie Holan 
  * Sign up for our daily email newsletter and get our latest fact-checks delivered to your inbox
  * Follow us on Twitter
  * Fan us on Facebook

Back to top

__

![](https://static.politifact.com/images/POLITIFACT_logo_rgb141x25.png)

# Offices

  * **District of Columbia**
  * 1100 Connecticut Ave. NW
  * Suite 1300B
  * Washington, DC 20036
  * **Florida**
  * 801 Third Street South
  * St. Petersburg, FL 33701
  * 727-821-9494

# State Editions

  * Arizona
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Florida
  * Georgia
  * Iowa
  * Illinois
  * Missouri
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New York
  * North Carolina
  * Ohio
  * Rhode Island
  * Pennsylvania
  * Texas
  * Virginia
  * Wisconsin

# Special Editions

  * National
  * Global News Project
  * PunditFact

# Policy

  * Privacy
  * Terms & Conditions
  * Copyright

# Advertise With Us

  * Media Kit
  * Market info
  * Rates & Specs

# About Us

  * As Seen On
  * Staff
  * Process
  * Funding

# State Editions

  * Arizona
  * California
  * Colorado
  * Florida
  * Georgia
  * Iowa
  * Illinois
  * Missouri
  * Nevada
  * New Hampshire
  * New York
  * North Carolina
  * Ohio
  * Pennsylvania
  * Rhode Island
  * Texas
  * Virginia
  * Wisconsin

# Special Editions

  * National
  * Global News Project
  * PunditFact

# Policy

  * Privacy
  * Terms & Conditions
  * Copyright

# Advertise With Us

  * Media Kit
  * Market info
  * Rates & Specs

# About Us

  * As Seen On
  * Staff
  * Process
  * Funding

# Stay Connected

# Fact-Check Suggestions

(C)All Rights Reserved Poynter Institute 2019, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit
organization

  * Editions 
    * National
    * PunditFact
    * Health Check
    * Facebook Hoaxes
    * States 
    * California
    * Florida
    * Illinois
    * Missouri
    * New Hampshire
    * New York
    * North Carolina
    * Pennsylvania
    * Texas
    * Virginia
    * West Virginia
    * Vermont
    * Wisconsin
  * Truth-O-MeterTM
    * All
    * By subject
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
    * No Flip
    * Half Flip
    * Full Flop
  * People 
    * Donald Trump
    * Mike Pence
    * Barack Obama
    * Chain E-mails
    * Other people and groups
  * Promises 
    * Trump-O-Meter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Not yet rated
    * In the Works
    * Stalled
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
    * Obameter 
    * All
    * Top 25 Promises
    * By subject
    * Promise Kept
    * Compromise
    * Promise Broken
  * Pants On Fire
  * About Us 
    * Our Process
    * Our Staff
    * Who Pays for Politifact
    * Suggest a Fact Check
  * Donate

  * **Oregon Edition**

  * The Oregon Truth-O-Meter 
    * All
    * True
    * Mostly True
    * Half True
    * Mostly False
    * False
    * Pants on Fire!
  * Promises
  * Articles
  * People
  * Elections
  * Subjects

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-23nLlPXNTk7P6.gif)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

