

![Merriam-Webster Logo](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/static/app-

standalone-images/MW_logo.png)

SINCE 1828

Menu

  *     *       *   * JOIN MWU 

Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search
features--ad free! JOIN NOW

  * GAMES
  * BROWSE THESAURUS
  * WORD OF THE DAY
  * WORDS AT PLAY
  * MORE __

WORD OF THE DAY WORDS AT PLAY TIME TRAVELER

  * TIME TRAVELER

Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

dictionary thesaurus

  * JOIN MWU
  * GAMES
  * THESAURUS
  * WORD OF THE DAY
  * WORDS AT PLAY
  * TIME TRAVELER

Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram

![alt-5cf7f9b11943a](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/images/article/art-

home-featured-

carousel/alt-5cf7f9b11943a-6543-926fbcbbc6908aea4c78b68342b0843d@1x.jpg)

##### Enter the Haiku That Can Pay You Contest

Your poem could win $$

![woman taking selfie talking to camera](//www.merriam-

webster.com/assets/mw/images/article/art-home-featured-carousel/woman-taking-

selfie-talking-to-camera-6550-3ae7a277635d05e57f4f68d04c8b6b9d@1x.jpg)

##### Words We’re Watching: ‘Velfie’

Be the star of your own movie.

![merriam webster time traveler](//www.merriam-

webster.com/assets/mw/images/article/art-home-featured-carousel/merriam-

webster-time-traveler-5771-bb5c2441430e13df809f11d286e40bc9@1x.jpg)

##### Try the Merriam-Webster Time Traveler!

Which words are as old as you?

![contractions](//www.merriam-webster.com/assets/mw/images/video/vid-home-

featured-carousel/contractions-6218-27fb55493c33d5668b9647284d70edea@1x.jpg)

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

You all would not have guessed some of these

#### TRENDING NOW

  1. folderol Rees-Mogg dismisses Brexit changes 

  2. reticent Mueller's team hesitant to testify 

  3. codify Dem candidates call to protect Roe v. Wade 

  4. contempt, held in contempt Barr in contempt of Congress 

  5. DEFCON CNN describes Trump-Congress confrontation 

SEE ALL

#### Take a 3-minute break

![How Strong Is Your

Vocabulary?](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### How Strong Is Your Vocabulary?

Test your vocabulary with our 10-question quiz!

Take the quiz

#### WORD OF THE DAY

#### June 11, 2019

#### chasten

to cause to be more humble or restrained

Get Word of the Day daily email!

### PODCAST

#### Videos

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
_play_

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

![contractions](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
_play_

##### On Contractions of Multiple Words

![onomatopoeia

video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
_play_

##### A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia

![body parts

video](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
_play_

##### When Body Parts Are Also Verbs

![image1443709626](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
_play_

##### 'Chasten' — Video Word of the Day 6/11/2019

See All Videos

#### Word Games

![time traveler quiz which word came

first](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Time Traveler Quiz: Which Word Came First?

Which word entered the English language first?

Play Now

![True or

False](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### True or False?

Test your knowledge - and maybe learn something along the way.

Play Now

![Word Winder's

CrossWinder](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Word Winder's CrossWinder

A game of winding words.

Play Now

* * *

#### Editors' Picks

![polar

vortex](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Polar 'Vortex' Freezes Midwest

Polar vortex hits Midwest

![book parts

page](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### Book Anatomy Words: Quire, Colophon, and More

![jury rigged vs jerry built vs jerry

rigged](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### 'Jerry-built' vs. 'Jury-rigged' vs. 'Jerry-rigged'

![image1815466723](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

##### How Do You Pronounce 'Vase'?

* * *

#### Popular Words : Past 24 Hours

##### absolve

1

##### communication

2

##### eviscerate

3

##### nexus

4

##### e.g.

5

##### culture

6

##### fascism

7

##### existential

8

##### affable

9

##### demagogue

10

View All

* * *

#### Our Apps

On the go? Never miss a single word!

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

![App

Store](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)
![Google

Play](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)

Merriam Webster

Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

  * SPANISH CENTRAL
  * LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
  * WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
  * VISUAL DICTIONARY

  * SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER

  * MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
  * BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
  * NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION

FOLLOW US

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * YouTube
  * Instagram

  * Browse the Dictionary:

  * a
  * b
  * c
  * d
  * e
  * f
  * g
  * h
  * i
  * j
  * k
  * l
  * m
  * n
  * o
  * p
  * q
  * r
  * s
  * t
  * u
  * v
  * w
  * x
  * y
  * z
  * 0-9

  * Home 

  * Help 
  * Apps 
  * About Us 
  * Shop 
  * Advertising Info 
  * Dictionary API 
  * Contact Us 
  * Video 
  * Favorites 
  * Word of the Year 
  * Law Dictionary 
  * Medical Dictionary 
  * Privacy Policy 
  * Terms of Use

  * Browse the Thesaurus 

  * Browse the Medical Dictionary
  * Browse the Legal Dictionary
  * Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary

No other dictionary matches M-W's accuracy and scholarship in defining word
meanings. Our pronunciation help, synonyms, usage and grammar tips set the
standard. Go beyond dictionary lookups with Word of the Day, facts and
observations on language, lookup trends, and wordplay from the editors at
Merriam-Webster Dictionary.

© 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

