

  * Pension Reform
  * Drug Policy
  * Education
  * Transportation
  * Newsletters
  * __
  * __
  * __
  * __

![Reason Foundation](https://reason.org/wp-content/themes/reason-

org/assets/img/logos/logo-horizontal.svg)

  * About ****
    * 50th Anniversary Gala Highlights
    * About Us
    * Contact Us
    * Email Newsletters
    * Events
    * FAQs
    * Jobs & Internships
    * Staff
    * Trustees & Officers
  * Experts ****

#### Browse Our Experts

    
    
      * Guy Bentley
    

Director of Consumer Freedom

    
    
      * Truong Bui
    

Policy Analyst

    
    
      * Baruch Feigenbaum
    

Assistant Director, Transportation Policy

    
    
      * Leonard Gilroy
    

Vice President, Government Reform

    
    
      * Adrian Moore
    

Vice President of Policy

    
    
      * Teri Moore
    

Policy Analyst, Editor

    
    
      * Anil Niraula
    

Policy Analyst

    
    
      * Robert Poole
    

Director of Transportation Policy

    
    
      * Spence Purnell
    

Policy Analyst

    
    
      * Aaron Smith
    

Director of Education Reform

    
    
      * Austill Stuart
    

Policy Analyst

    
    
      * View All Experts
    

  * Topics ****

#### Browse Our Topics

    
    
      * Air Traffic Control
    
      * Annual Highway Report
    
      * Climate Change
    
      * Consumer Freedom
    
      * Drug Policy
    
      * Education
    
      * Environment
    
      * Government Reform
    
      * Pension Reform
    
      * Privatization
    
      * Transportation
    
      * View All Topics
    

  * Publications ****
    * Aviation Policy Newsletter
    * Amicus Briefs
    * Annual Highway Report
    * Annual Privatization Report
    * Commentaries
    * Drug Policy Newsletter
    * Email Newsletters
    * Harm Reduction Newsletter
    * Innovators in Action
    * Pension Reform Newsletter
    * Podcasts
    * Policy Studies
    * Privatization Newsletter
    * Student-Based Budgeting Newsletter
    * Surface Transportation E-Newsletter
    * Testimony
  * Reason.com
  * Donate
  * __

  * __

Submit

loading...

![Does Legalizing Marijuana Reduce Crime?](https://reason.org/wp-

content/uploads/dreamstime_xl_53552919-650x365.jpg)

© Dreamstime.com

### Policy Brief

# Does Legalizing Marijuana Reduce Crime?

### In states that have legalized marijuana for either medical or recreational

use, any adverse effects of such increased demand are more than offset by
reductions in crime associated with legalization.

By Julian Morris  
September 28, 2018

__

__

__

__

__

The evidence presented in this brief suggests that legalization of marijuana
for medical or recreational use results in:

1\. Patients substituting marijuana for other drugs, including opiates.

2\. Marijuana consumers substituting legitimate marijuana for illicit
marijuana.

3\. A significant reduction in crimes associated with marijuana production,
distribution, sale and possession.

4\. Reductions in other crimes, including some property and violent crimes.

These effects vary by location, with reductions in property and violent crimes
being most pronounced in locations close to the Mexican border due to the
diminution of activities of Mexican drug trafficking organizations and
affiliated gangs. Medical marijuana legalization also appears to be associated
with a reduction in drunk driving.

The effects of the legalization of marijuana for recreational use are less
clear. In addition, there is evidence that depenalization of possession
increases the demand for marijuana. In states that have not also legalized
marijuana either for medical or recreational use, this may lead to increases
in crime (though the evidence is weak). However, in states that have legalized
marijuana for either medical or recreational use, any adverse effects of such
increased demand are more than offset by reductions in crime associated with
legalization.

The largest benefits in terms of crime reduction, with the possible exception
of traffic-related crimes, come from the legalization of marijuana for adult
recreational use. Moreover, given the strong relationship between the reduced
price of marijuana and reduced criminal activity associated with marijuana
production, distribution and supply, these benefits are likely to be stronger
in markets that are more competitive.

**Full Brief: Does Legalizing Marijuana Reduce Crime?**

__

__

__

__

__

![](https://reason.org/wp-

content/uploads/2016/04/5bb9f3337dd33c84ea255f8cb7acf33b.th_-149x150.jpg)

Julian Morris is a senior fellow at Reason Foundation and executive director
of the International Center for Law and Economics.

* * *

* * *

Media Contact

#### More from Drug Policy

  * ![Marijuana Delivery: Addressing Concerns and Public Policy Issues](https://reason.org/wp-content/uploads/dreamstime_xl_111816374-380x211.jpg)

##### Marijuana Delivery: Addressing Concerns and Public Policy Issues

There is little reason to suggest that any of the social and economic costs
potentially associated with legalization are exacerbated to any extent by
allowing delivery services.

By Spence Purnell  
June 3, 2019

  * ![High Prescription Drug Prices Hit Pension Plans, Hurt State and Local Taxpayers](https://reason.org/wp-content/uploads/dreamstime_l_104354031-1-380x211.jpg)

##### High Prescription Drug Prices Hit Pension Plans, Hurt State and Local

Taxpayers

While high prescription drugs costs are most often seen as a problem for
individual consumers or the federal Medicare program, they also significantly
impact state and local governments.

By Marc Joffe  
May 20, 2019

  * ![How to Modify Florida’s Approach to the Opioid Crisis](https://reason.org/wp-content/uploads/dreamstime_l_100525214-380x211.jpg)

##### How to Modify Florida's Approach to the Opioid Crisis

Rather than doubling down on what hasn’t worked for decades, we need to
embrace harm-reduction approaches.

By Adrian Moore  
May 17, 2019

#### More by Julian Morris

  * ![How Burdensome Regulation Obstructs Hunger Relief](https://reason.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/dreamstime_xl_84090367-380x211.jpg)

##### How Burdensome Regulation Obstructs Hunger Relief

This brief offers recommendations to help solve hunger by reforming current
regulatory regimes that block the diffusion of beneficial technologies.

By Krisztina Pusok and Julian Morris  
August 29, 2018

  * ![The Gateway Effect of Marijuana](https://reason.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/dreamstime_xl_41519061-380x211.jpg)

##### The Gateway Effect of Marijuana

Given the weak evidence for a causal relationship between youth marijuana use
and subsequent use of other drugs, policymakers should not be overly concerned
about the brain chemistry gateway effect.

By Julian Morris  
May 25, 2018

  * ![Fuel Economy Standards Hurt Consumers and the Economy](https://reason.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/dreamstime_xl_37779369-380x211.jpg)

##### Fuel Economy Standards Hurt Consumers and the Economy

Mileage-based user fees are better suited to address the pollution associated
with vehicle use.

By Julian Morris  
April 10, 2018

#### More Research

  * ![Marijuana Delivery: Addressing Concerns and Public Policy Issues](https://reason.org/wp-content/uploads/dreamstime_xl_111816374-380x211.jpg)

##### Marijuana Delivery: Addressing Concerns and Public Policy Issues

There is little reason to suggest that any of the social and economic costs
potentially associated with legalization are exacerbated to any extent by
allowing delivery services.

By Spence Purnell  
June 3, 2019

  * ![A Common Sense Approach to Marijuana Therapy](https://reason.org/wp-content/uploads/dreamstime_xl_11612032-380x211.jpg)

##### A Common Sense Approach to Marijuana Therapy

Individuals and their doctors should be making appropriate marijuana therapy
determinations.

By Spence Purnell  
April 30, 2019

  * ![Market Size Estimates For Legalized Marijuana](https://reason.org/wp-content/uploads/dreamstime_xl_143548262-380x211.jpg)

##### Market Size Estimates For Legalized Marijuana

Estimates for the potential size of a new legal marijuana market are often
riddled with uncertainty and inaccuracy, and can also be skewed by tenuous
assumptions.

By Spence Purnell and Allie Howell  
April 29, 2019

#### Follow

  * __Facebook
  * __Twitter
  * __Google+
  * __YouTube
  * __RSS

#### Email Updates

Get weekly updates from Reason.

#### More About Reason Foundation

  * About
  * Contact
  * Donate
  * Email Newsletters
  * Events
  * Jobs and Internships
  * Policy Research
  * Reason magazine

#### Contact

**Reason Foundation**  
5737 Mesmer Ave.  
Los Angeles, CA 90230  
(310) 391-2245

1747 Connecticut Ave NW  
Washington, DC 20009  
(202) 986-0916

Privacy Policy

Copyright (C) 2019 Reason

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

