

### Subspecialties

  * Cataract/Anterior Segment
  * Comprehensive Ophthalmology
  * Cornea/External Disease
  * Glaucoma
  * Neuro-Ophthalmology/Orbit
  * Pediatric Ophthalmology/Strabismus

###

  * Ocular Pathology/Oncology
  * Oculoplastics/Orbit
  * Refractive Management/Intervention
  * Retina/Vitreous
  * Uveitis

### Focus On

  * Pediatric Ophthalmology Education Center
  * Oculofacial Plastic Surgery Center
  * Laser Surgery Education Center
  * Redmond Ethics Center
  * Global Ophthalmology Guide

### Academy Publications

  * _EyeNet_
  * _Ophthalmology_
  * _Ophthalmology Glaucoma_
  * _Ophthalmology Retina_

### Information for:

  * International Ophthalmologists
  * Media
  * Medical Students
  * Patients and Public
  * Technicians and Nurses
  * Senior Ophthalmologists
  * Young Ophthalmologists

### Tools and Services

  * EyeCare America
  * Help
  * IRIS Registry
  * Medicare Physician Payment
  * Meetings and Deadlines
  * Museum of the Eye
  * Ophthalmology Job Center

### Our Sites

  * EyeWiki
  * International Society of Refractive Surgery

### Subspecialties

  * Cataract/Anterior Segment
  * Comprehensive Ophthalmology
  * Cornea/External Disease
  * Glaucoma
  * Neuro-Ophthalmology/Orbit
  * Pediatric Ophthalmology/Strabismus
  * Ocular Pathology/Oncology
  * Oculoplastics/Orbit
  * Refractive Management/Intervention
  * Retina/Vitreous
  * Uveitis

### Focus On

  * Glaucoma Education Center
  * Pediatric Ophthalmology Education Center
  * Oculofacial Plastic Surgery Center
  * Laser Surgery Education Center
  * Redmond Ethics Center
  * Global Ophthalmology Guide

### Find an Ophthalmologist

Advanced Search

  * Annual Meeting
  * Clinical Education
  * Practice Management
  * Member Services
  * Advocacy
  * Foundation
  * About
  * Subspecialties & More
  * Eye Health

  * Home

  * Annual Meeting
  * Clinical Education
  * Practice Management
  * Member Services
  * Advocacy
  * Foundation
  * About
  * Subspecialties & More

### Academy Publications

    
    
    * _EyeNet_
    * _Ophthalmology_
    * _Ophthalmology Glaucoma_
    * _Ophthalmology Retina_
    

### Information for:

    
    
    * International Ophthalmologists
    * Media
    * Medical Students
    * Patients and Public
    * Technicians and Nurses
    * Senior Ophthalmologists
    * Young Ophthalmologists
    

### Tools and Services

    
    
    * EyeCare America
    * Help
    * IRIS Registry
    * Medicare Physician Payment
    * Meetings and Deadlines
    * Museum of the Eye
    * Ophthalmology Job Center
    

### Our Sites

    
    
    * EyeWiki
    * International Society of Refractive Surgery
    

### Subspecialties

    
    
    * Cataract/Anterior Segment
    * Comprehensive Ophthalmology
    * Cornea/External Disease
    * Glaucoma
    * Neuro-Ophthalmology/Orbit
    * Pediatric Ophthalmology/Strabismus
    * Ocular Pathology/Oncology
    * Oculoplastics/Orbit
    * Refractive Management/Intervention
    * Retina/Vitreous
    * Uveitis
    

### Focus On

    
    
    * Glaucoma Education Center
    * Pediatric Ophthalmology Education Center
    * Oculofacial Plastic Surgery Center
    * Laser Surgery Education Center
    * Redmond Ethics Center
    * Global Ophthalmology Guide
    

### Find an Ophthalmologist

Advanced Search

### Subspecialties

    
    
    * Cataract/Anterior Segment
    * Comprehensive Ophthalmology
    * Cornea/External Disease
    * Glaucoma
    * Neuro-Ophthalmology/Orbit
    * Pediatric Ophthalmology/Strabismus
    

###

    
    
    * Ocular Pathology/Oncology
    * Oculoplastics/Orbit
    * Refractive Management/Intervention
    * Retina/Vitreous
    * Uveitis
    

### Focus On

    
    
    * Pediatric Ophthalmology Education Center
    * Oculofacial Plastic Surgery Center
    * Laser Surgery Education Center
    * Redmond Ethics Center
    * Global Ophthalmology Guide
    

  * Eye Health

  * 

Find an Ophthalmologist

Academy Store

  * Eye Health A-Z
  * Symptoms
  * Glasses & Contacts
  * Tips & Prevention
  * News
  * Ask an Ophthalmologist
  * Patient Stories
  * Español

  *     * Eye Health /
    * Tips & Prevention
  * ## Marijuana

Sections

    
    
    * Does Marijuana Help Treat Glaucoma or Other Eye Conditions?
    * Why Eye Doctors Don't Recommend Marijuana for Glaucoma Infographic
    

  * ![A marijuana leaf sitting on top of a text eye chart.](/detail/image.axd?id=2acb3325-89dd-4562-bff2-3e1dac94e123&t=636842950823600000)

# Does Marijuana Help Treat Glaucoma or Other Eye Conditions?

Leer en Español:

¿Ayuda la marihuana a tratar el glaucoma u otras afecciones oculares?

Written By: David Turbert and Dan T. Gudgel

Reviewed By: Andrew George Iwach, MD

Feb. 07, 2019

Cannabis and currently available compounds derived from marijuana - like CBD -
are not an adequate treatment for glaucoma, or any eye condition. To treat
glaucoma, eye pressure must be managed 24 hours a day. Marijuana is not a
practical treatment for constant use. And more research is still needed into
the exact effects of cannabis and cannabis compounds on eye pressure and
glaucoma.

The American Academy of Ophthalmology does not recommend marijuana or other
cannabis products for the treatment of glaucoma. The American Glaucoma Society
and the Canadian Ophthalmological Society agree.

Several current, effective treatments for glaucoma are more reliable and safer
than marijuana. If you have glaucoma, you should follow your ophthalmologist's
advice to get the treatment that's right for you.

**The bottom line about marijuana and glaucoma is:**

    
    
    * The largest association of eye physicians and surgeons in the world does not endorse cannabis or its derivates as a glaucoma treatment.
    * Do not self-medicate with marijuana in an attempt to treat glaucoma. You can lose your vision if you don't have a reliable, effective treatment for glaucoma.
    * Speak with your ophthalmologist to find the glaucoma treatment option that's best for you.
    * Tell your doctor if you do use marijuana regularly.
    

## What is the Connection Between Glaucoma and Marijuana?

Glaucoma is an eye condition in which the optic nerve becomes damaged over
time, first reducing peripheral vision before possibly leading to total
blindness. One cause of optic nerve damage in glaucoma is higher-than-normal
eye pressure (intraocular pressure or IOP).

As marijuana has been legalized for medical or recreational use in more U.S.
states and Canada, it has become more visible and discussed as a possible
treatment for many health conditions. Research in the 1970s and 1980s did show
a measurable decrease in intraocular pressure for three or four hours after
smoking cannabis or ingesting THC as a pill or injection. But to treat
glaucoma and save vision, eye pressure has to be controlled 24 hours a day.

To reduce intraocular pressure by 3 to 5 mm Hg -- and maintain that reduction
\-- you would have to ingest about 18 to 20 mg of THC six to eight times a
day, every day. The possible negative effects on mood, mental clarity and (if
smoked) lung health would be significant. You would not be able to drive,
operate machinery or engage in many common activities. In addition, the cost
of using marijuana every three to four hours, every day makes it cost-
prohibitive for most patients.

As a comparison, alcohol also has a moderate intraocular pressure-lowering
effect for an hour or so after a drink. But no doctor would recommend that you
drink alcohol every hour to treat glaucoma. Many other effective treatments
are available that don't have the side-effects of alcohol.

## Studies Haven't Proven That THC is Effective or Reliable for Glaucoma

Treatment

Studies have been done on THC eye drops, pills and cigarettes. Eye drops led
to burning, irritated eyes and were shown to not lower eye pressure. A
sublingual (placed in the mouth under the tongue) THC compound found no
reduction in intraocular pressure. For another study, glaucoma patients were
offered THC-containing pills and/or cigarettes. Within nine months all of them
asked to stop due to side effects.

As scientists learn more about glaucoma, they have also come to understand
that high intraocular pressure in the fluid at the front of the eye is not the
only cause of optic nerve damage. Increasing evidence shows that reduced flow
of blood to the optic nerve may also cause damage in patients with glaucoma.
Marijuana not only lowers eye pressure, it also lowers blood pressure
throughout the body. As a result, marijuana has the potential to lower the
blood flow to the optic nerve, effectively canceling out the benefit of
lowered intraocular pressure.

## What About CBD for Glaucoma?

In recent years, CBD has received a lot of attention and scrutiny. CBD is a
derivative of cannabis that doesn't have mood-altering effects. But just like
cannabis that's smoked or eaten, there is no accepted, current research that
shows CBD to be an effective treatment for glaucoma. In fact, one recent study
showed that CBD may actually increase IOP, which would make glaucoma worse.

## What is the Future of Marijuana for Glaucoma Treatment?

Currently, the only way to control glaucoma and prevent vision loss is to
lower the pressure in your eye. Your ophthalmologist can treat glaucoma with
medication, such as prescription eye drops, or surgery, depending on the type
of glaucoma and how severe it is.

Scientists are exploring whether the active ingredients in marijuana may yet
offer a glaucoma treatment. If the effects of cannabis compounds can be
isolated, made to be long-acting, and the side effects eliminated, they may
lead to new treatments in the future. However, such developments require more
research and are years away from becoming a reality.

#### Next

Why Eye Doctors Don't Recommend Marijuana for Glaucoma Infographic

  * ## Related

![](/detail/image.axd?id=7b397a01-e680-4e41-8437-04233a875d36&t=636834181626770000)

What Is Ocular Hypertension?

Jun 04, 2019

![](/detail/image.axd?id=7b397a01-e680-4e41-8437-04233a875d36&t=636834181626770000)

Ocular Hypertension Causes

Jun 04, 2019

![](/detail/image.axd?id=d53b2a31-4a9b-46c0-acc2-92ea06216546&t=636952739719500000)

Ocular Hypertension Diagnosis and Treatment

Jun 04, 2019

![](/detail/image.axd?id=e1e470f5-13e7-401e-a8b3-a401e215adbe&t=636810149134530000)

Stem Cell Therapy for Eye Disease: What You Need to Know

Jun 04, 2019

![](/detail/image.axd?id=9f0036aa-b3ec-4da1-b0a7-13758319865a&t=636857614137270000)

Pseudoexfoliation Diagnosis and Treatment

Jun 02, 2019

  *     * Find an Ophthalmologist

Search

Advanced Search

  * Ask an Ophthalmologist

Browse Answers

  * Free Newsletter

Get ophthalmologist-reviewed tips and information about eye health and
preserving your vision.

  * Required * Valid Email Address Required

Privacy Policy

  * ![EyeCare America - no-cost medical eye exams for qualifying seniors](/image.axd?id=daeafdd9-530c-48eb-b7ce-483118bfddc0&t=636840216728370000)

  * Contact Us

  * About the Academy
  * Jobs at the Academy
  * Financial Relationships with Industry

  * Medical Disclaimer

  * Privacy Policy
  * Terms of Service

  * For Advertisers

  * For Media
  * Ophthalmology Job Center

### OUR SITES

  * EyeWiki
  * International Society of Refractive Surgery

### FOLLOW THE ACADEMY

Medical Professionals

  * ![Facebook](/image.axd?id=3ef5b5c4-a469-46f0-8567-e6a79b9bd187)
  * ![Twitter](/image.axd?id=4ab1e287-f23e-4db2-9e12-c5b501bb4cce)
  * ![LinkedIn](/image.axd?id=e958f382-d2f7-45be-8038-2ee6b1216587)
  * ![YouTube](/image.axd?id=fa46750d-5561-414f-97e7-39169735db5d)

Public & Patients

  * ![Facebook](/image.axd?id=3ef5b5c4-a469-46f0-8567-e6a79b9bd187)
  * ![Twitter](/image.axd?id=4ab1e287-f23e-4db2-9e12-c5b501bb4cce)
  * ![YouTube](/image.axd?id=fa46750d-5561-414f-97e7-39169735db5d)
  * ![Instagram](/asset.axd?Id=111839ce-ac27-45dc-9dd9-921c6928ea9b)

(C) American Academy of Ophthalmology 2019

![DCSIMG](//wtcollecting.aao.org/dcs8vijuh100000wsnatv9z1f_6o9l/njs.gif?dcsuri=/nojavascript&WT.js=No&WT.tv=9.4.0&dcssip=www.aao.org)

## * Required

  * First Name: | 
  * Last Name: |   
Member ID: |

  * Phone Number: | 
  * Email: | 
  * Enter code: | 

  * Message: |   
\---|---  
|

## Thank you

Your feedback has been sent.

![DCSIMG](http://wtcollecting.aao.org/dcs1g8cv910000wogalmof97a_1o9t/njs.gif?dcsuri=/nojavascript&WT.js=No&WT.tv=9.4.0&dcssip=www.aao.org)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

