

![Home](https://files.texaspolicy.com/assets/109b7aca08da23a19c3eed6b821f6248/images/logo-

full.svg)

  * About
  * Multimedia
  * Events
  * Issues
  * Initiatives
  * Press
  * Donate
  * Search 
  * 

# 25 things the Bill of Rights says the government cannot do

February 3, 2016

Local Government

## Share

  *     *       *         * 

### ![](/Library/imglib/Screen-Shot-2016-02-03-at-3.22.07-PM.png)

### Amendment I

1\. The government cannot make you believe in a religion.

2\. The government cannot keep you from practicing any religion you choose.

3\. The government cannot keep you from saying what you wish.

4\. The government cannot keep you from writing what you want.

5\. The government cannot stop you from publishing what you want.

6\. The government cannot keep you from joining together peacefully with
others to express your views.

7\. The government cannot prevent you from complaining about what the
government or others are doing to you.

### Amendment II

8\. The government cannot take away your right to own and keep guns.

### Amendment III

9\. The government cannot make you let soldiers live in your house unless the
country comes under attack and Congress specifically authorizes it.

### Amendment IV

10\. The government cannot come into your home unless it has legal permission
from a judge.

### Amendment V

11\. The government cannot hold you in jail for a major crime without the
knowledge and approval of your fellow citizens.

12\. The government cannot try a person twice for the same crime.

13\. The government cannot make you incriminate yourself.

14\. The government cannot take away your life, liberty, or property without
following the law.

15\. The government cannot take your private property from you for public use
unless it pays to you what your property is worth.

### Amendment VI

16\. The government cannot hold you in jail for a long time without a trial if
you are accused of having broken the law.

17\. The government cannot deny to you a speedy trial with a jury of your
fellow citizens.

18\. The government cannot keep secret from you those who will speak against
you.

19\. The government cannot prevent you from having your personal attorney.

20\. The government cannot keep you from having other people help you defend
yourself in a courtroom.

###

### Amendment VII

21\. The government cannot keep you from having a trial decided by your fellow
citizens in civil disputes and the fact-finding by the jury in those trials
cannot be overturned by other courts.

### Amendment VIII

22\. The government cannot make people pay an unfairly high amount of money
for bail while they wait for a judge or jury to hear their case.

23\. The government cannot punish you for a crime in a cruel and unusual way.

### Amendment IX

24\. The government cannot limit your rights to just those listed in the Bill
of Rights.

### Amendment X

25\. The government cannot claim to possess more power and authority than what
the Constitution permits, and all other powers not listed in the Constitution
belong to the states or individuals.

_Thank you to William Davis of Fort Worth for providing this._

## Related content

### Healthcare Should Be About Patients, Not Products

Health Care June 10, 2019

### Trump Vs. Obama, Texas Vs. California -- Arguing Over Jobs & The Economy

And Why It Matters

Economy June 10, 2019

### Tree 6 Mafia: It's Hard Out Here for a Tree Farm

Property Rights June 10, 2019

results for

Sort by: Relevance | Date

Load More

## The Cannon daily email connects today’s news with

the research and opinion you need from TPPF’s top experts.

Subscribe

## Texas Public Policy Foundation social network links

## Phone Number and Address

512.472.2700 |  
901 Congress Avenue,  
Austin, Texas 78701

Copyright © 2019  
Texas Public Policy Foundation

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

