

Skip to main content

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

![Logo for

WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

  * Check Your Symptoms
  * Find A Doctor
  * Find A Dentist
  * Find Lowest Drug Prices

  * Health  
A-Z Health A-Z

Health A-Z

### Common Conditions

    
    
    * ADD/ADHD
    * Allergies
    * Arthritis
    * Cancer
    * Cold, Flu & Cough
    * Depression
    * Diabetes
    * Eye Health
    * Heart Disease
    * Lung Disease
    * Orthopedics
    * Pain Management
    * Sexual Conditions
    * Skin Problems
    * Sleep Disorders
    * View All
    

### Resources

    
    
    * Symptom Checker
    * Expert Blogs and Interviews
    * Podcasts
    * Message Boards
    * Questions & Answers
    * Insurance Guide
    * Find a Doctor
    * Children's Conditions A-Z
    * Surgeries and Procedures A-Z
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![woman with migraine](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/generic_migraine_woman_2_other/110x70_generic_migraine_woman_2_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Get Help for Migraine Relief
    * ![knee joint illustration](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/all_about_joints_rmq/110x70_all_about_joints_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Things That Can Hurt Your Joints
    

  * Drugs &  
Supplements Drugs & Supplements

Drugs & Supplements

### Find & Review

    
    
    * Drugs
    * Supplements
    

### Tools

    
    
    * Manage Your Medications
    * Pill Identifier
    * Check for Interactions
    

### Drug Basics & Safety

    
    
    * Commonly Abused Drugs
    * Taking Meds When Pregnant
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![assorted vitamins](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/vitamins_alt11_other/110x70_vitamins_alt11_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Vitamins You Need as You Age
    * ![berry and yogurt on spoon](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/probiotcs_rmq/110x70_probiotcs_rmq.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Supplements for Better Digestion
    

  * Living   
Healthy Living Healthy

Living Healthy

### Diet, Food & Fitness

    
    
    * Diet & Weight Management
    * Weight Loss & Obesity
    * Food & Recipes
    * Fitness & Exercise
    

### Beauty & Balance

    
    
    * Healthy Beauty
    * Health & Balance
    * Sex & Relationships
    * Oral Care
    

### Living Well

    
    
    * Women's Health
    * Men's Health
    * Aging Well
    * Healthy Sleep
    * Healthy Teens
    * Fit Kids
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![doughnut and avocado](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/which_has_more_fat_slideshow/110x70_which_has_more_fat_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Slideshow Which Food Has More Saturated Fat?
    * ![walking sneakers](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/rich_media_quiz/topic/rmq_benefits_of_walking/405rmq_thinkstock_woman_walking_sneakers.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Do You Know the Benefits of Walking?
    

  * Family &  
Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy

Family & Pregnancy

### All About Pregnancy

    
    
    * Getting Pregnant
    * First Trimester
    * Second Trimester
    * Third Trimester
    * View All
    

### Parenting Guide

    
    
    * Newborn & Baby
    * Children's Health
    * Children's Vaccines
    * Raising Fit Kids
    * View All
    

### Pet Care Essentials

    
    
    * Healthy Cats
    * Healthy Dogs
    * View All
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![new mom and baby](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/newborn_alt1_other/110x70_newborn_alt1_other.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Expert Blog Dangers After Childbirth -- What to Watch For
    * ![woman with question marks](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/video/vd_1376_0002_video/110x70_vd_1376_0002_video.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Quiz Tips for Success ... Things Every Teen Should Know
    

  * News &  
Experts News & Experts

News & Experts

### Health News

    
    
    * Heartburn Drugs Again Tied to Fatal Risks
    * Do You Really Need 10,000 Steps a Day?
    * Deaths From Falls Increasing Among the Elderly
    * FDA Finds Toxic Chemicals in Many Foods
    * We Eat, Drink, Breathe 70,000 Plastic Bits a Year
    

### Experts & Community

    
    
    * Message Boards
    * Expert Blogs
    * News Center
    

#### Featured Topics

    
    
    * ![photo of man sitting on edge of bed](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/other/sleep_special_report_other/650x350_sleep_special_report_man.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) WebMD Investigates Why Can't We Sleep?
    * ![man using computer mouse](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2015/06_2015/fake_online_pharmacies/110x70_fake_online_pharmacies.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-quality=50) Newsletters Sign Up to Receive Our Free Newsletters
    

  * Mobile Apps
  * Subscriptions

  * Sign In

  * Subscribe
  * My Profile
    * My Tools
    * My WebMD Pages
    * My Account
    * Sign Out

### Smoking Cessation Home

  * News
  * Reference
  * Quizzes
  * Slideshows
  * Videos
  * Message Boards

### Smoking Cessation Health Center

  * Quitting Smoking
  * How to Quit
  * Quit Smoking FAQ
  * What Happens When You Quit?
  * Reasons to Quit
  * Treatment & Aids
  * Nicotine Withdrawal
  * Staying Smoke-Free

### Related to Smoking Cessation

  * Quit-Smoking Assessment
  * COPD
  * Emphysema
  * Heart Disease
  * Hypnosis
  * Lung Cancer
  * Lung Disease
  * Oral Health
  * Stress Management
  * Substance Abuse & Addiction

  * Smoking Cessation

  * News

# Marijuana Smoking Doesn't Kill

Illegal Herb Not Harmless, but Data Show No Link to Death

By Daniel J. DeNoon

From the WebMD Archives

Sept. 18, 2003 -- Marijuana smoking isn't harmless, but at least it won't kill
you.

It's been feared that marijuana smoke, like tobacco smoke, causes cancer and
heart disease. The evidence argues otherwise, writes Stephen Sidney, MD,
associate director for research for Kaiser Permanente, Oakland, Calif., in the
Sept 20 issue of _The British Medical Journal_.

"Although the use of [marijuana] is not harmless, the current knowledge base
does not support the assertion that it has any notable adverse public health
impact in relation to mortality," Sidney concludes.

## No Marijuana Deaths in 2 Large Studies

Sidney points to two large studies. The first is from (where else?)
California. A large HMO looked at 65,177 men and women age 15-49. Over 10
years, marijuana users died no sooner than nonusers.

The second study looked at 45,450 Swedish army conscripts. They were 18-20
years old when asked about marijuana use. Fifteen years later, the marijuana
users were just as likely to remain alive as nonusers.

And since marijuana smoking can't kill outright -- there's no such thing as a
fatal marijuana overdose -- short-term use isn't deadly. Long-term use can't
be good for you. But Sidney notes that most marijuana smokers don't become
long-term users.

One worry about marijuana smoke is that it is inhaled, and held, deep in the
lungs. But the typical user smokes only one marijuana cigarette -- or less --
a day. Tobacco users often smoke 20 or more cigarettes daily. Moreover,
tobacco contains nicotine, a highly addictive substance. Marijuana, Sidney
concludes, is less likely to harm than tobacco.

A 2001 study suggested that marijuana smoking increases the risk of heart
attack in the hour immediately after smoking. But this seems to be the case in
no more than one-fifth of 1% of heart attacks -- a very rare risk indeed.

## More Marijuana Deaths in the Future?

Marijuana users shouldn't cancel their life insurance policies just yet.
Sidney warns that longer-term data may indeed show that marijuana smoking
eventually raises the risk of premature death.

And if marijuana is legalized, long-term use may become more common. If this
is the case, there certainly will be more long-term effects of marijuana use.

SOURCE: Sidney, S. _The British Medical Journal_ , Sept. 20, 2003; vol 327: pp
635-636.

WebMD Health News

Â© 2003 WebMD, Inc. All rights reserved.

### Top Picks

  * Pipes & Cigars: Less Harmful Than Cigarettes?
  * 6 Reasons to Cut Your Tobacco Habit
  * How Smoking Affects Your Looks
  * Quit Tobacco: Is Cold Turkey the Best Way?
  * Free Tools to Stop Smoking
  * 5 Steps to Stub Out Your Smoking Habit

### further reading

  * Slideshow: Lung Cancer Risks -- Myths and Facts
  * Slideshow: Commonly Abused Drugs
  * Video: How Does Smoking Marijuana Hurt Your Brain?
  * Recreational Marijuana FAQ
  * Medical Marijuana in Colorado
  * Infertility: Tobacco, Marijuana, and Other Drugs
  * What Is Marijuana Abuse?
  * Marijuana Topics

### Today on WebMD

![hands breaking a

cigarette](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/09_2012/curbing_nicotine_addiction/110x70_curbing_nicotine_addiction.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### 13 Tips to Stop Smoking

Is quitting cold turkey an effective method?

![ashtray](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/quit_smoking_slideshow/110x70_quit_smoking_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Ready to Quit Smoking?

14 tips to get you through the first hard days.

![smoking

man](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/slideshows/surprising_way_smoking_affects_your_looks_and_life_slideshow/110x70_surprising_way_smoking_affects_your_looks_and_life_slideshow.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### 11 Ways Smoking Affects Your Looks

Surprising impacts of tobacco on the body.

![cigarette

smoke](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/quizzes/stop_smoking_quiz/110x70_stop_smoking_quiz.jpg?resize=110px:*&output-

quality=50)

#### Quit-Smoking Quiz

What happens when you kick the habit?

### Recommended for You

![Filtered

cigarettes](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/features/10_persistent_myths_about_smoking_features/69x75_10_persistent_myths_about_smoking_features.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) ARTICLE

#### Why Is Smoking So Addictive?

![an array of e

cigarettes](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/07_2012/e_cigarettes_unknown_consequences/69x75_e_cigarettes_unknown_consequences.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) ARTICLE

#### E-Cigarettes Pros and Cons

![human

heart](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/02_2012/heart_failure_side_effects/69x75_heart_failure_side_effects.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) ARTICLE

#### How Smoking Harms Your Heart

![Woman experiencing withdrawal

symptoms](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/alcohol_withdrawal/69x75_alcohol_withdrawal.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) ARTICLE

#### What Is Nicotine Withdrawal?

![man smoking

cigarette](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2012/02_2012/smoking_and_men/69x75_smoking_and_men.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) ARTICLE

#### Secondhand Smoke and Its Risks

![no smoking

sign](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/news/2011/11_2011/quitting_smoking/69x75_quitting_smoking.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) VIDEO

#### Stop Smoking, Forever

![Woman ashing cigarette in

ashtray](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/articles/thumbnails_daily_images/2011/08_2011/69x75_heart_risk_for_women_smokers.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) ARTICLE

#### 4 Reasons Why You Might Smoke

![chain

watch](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/article_thumbnails/reference_guide/hypnosis_for_quitting_smoking_ref_guide/69x75_hypnosis_for_quitting_smoking_ref_guide.jpg?resize=69px:*&output-

quality=50) ARTICLE

#### Hypnosis: Does It Work?

### Tools & Resources

  * Are Menthol Cigarettes Safer?
  * Helping Loved Ones Stop Smoking
  * Tips to Ease Nicotine Withdrawal
  * 4 Keys to Staying Smoke-Free
  * How to Quit Smoking For Good
  * What Causes a Smoking Relapse?

### Health Solutions

  * World Class Heart Care
  * Cancer Center 101
  * Treat Enlarged Prostate
  * Treating Baby Eczema
  * Clinical Trial Q&A
  * 3 Migraine Essentials
  * Opioid Addiction
  * Probiotics 101
  * The HPV Vaccine
  * Aging & Addiction
  * Support for PTSD
  * Penis Curved When Erect
  * Reduce Cancer Risk
  * Immunotherapy for Cancer
  * Bent Fingers?
  * Heal Dry, Cracked Skin

### More from WebMD

  * How Severe Is Your Psoriasis?
  * Live Better With MS Assessment
  * What Is Endometriosis?
  * Find Your MS Medical Support Team
  * How Does Chemo Work?
  * Stuck Inside? Snow Day Activities
  * Beat Crohn's Flares
  * Ways to Prevent Migraines
  * Managing Diabetes at Work
  * Routine Checkups You Shouldn't Miss
  * Avoid Allergy Triggers
  * Treating Advanced Prostate Cancer
  * Immunotherapy for Lung Cancer
  * Finding the Best MS Care Team
  * What's New in Psoriasis Research
  * Where Breast Cancer Spreads

  * ![Logo for WebMD](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/logos/webmd/web/webmd_logo.svg)

    * Visit WebMD on Facebook 
    * Visit WebMD on Twitter 
    * Visit WebMD on Pinterest 
  * ### Policies

    * Privacy Policy
    * Cookie Policy
    * Editorial Policy
    * Advertising Policy
    * Correction Policy
    * Terms of Use

### About

    
    
    * Contact Us
    * About WebMD
    * Careers
    * Newsletter
    * Corporate
    * WebMD Health Services
    * Site Map
    * Accessibility
    

  * ### WebMD Network

    * Medscape
    * Medscape Reference
    * MedicineNet
    * eMedicineHealth
    * RxList
    * OnHealth
    * WebMDRx
    * First Aid
    * WebMD Magazine
    * WebMD Health Record
    * Dictionary
    * Physician Directory
    * ### Our Apps

    * WebMD Mobile

    * WebMD App
    * Pregnancy
    * Baby
    * Allergy
    * Medscape

### For Advertisers

    
    
    * Advertise with Us
    * Advertising Policy
    

  * ![URAC Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/urac/urac_gold_star.png?resize=75:*)
  * ![TRUSTe](//privacy-policy.truste.com/privacy-seal/seal?rid=07326333-3522-463d-81bf-f00fd7171fff)
  * ![TAG Registered Seal](https://img.webmd.com/dtmcms/live/webmd/consumer_assets/site_images/layout/shared/tag-registered.png?resize=*:60px)
  * ![Honcode Seal](//www.honcode.ch/HONcode/Seal/HONConduct298987_s1.gif)
  * ![Adchoices](//choices.trustarc.com/get?name=admarker2.png)

(C) 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.

WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.

See additional information.

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id=428750600651790&ev=PageView&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&noscript=1)
![](https://ct.pinterest.com/v3/?tid=2618142259440&event=pagevisit&noscript=1)

![](//googleads.g.doubleclick.net/pagead/viewthroughconversion/875612316/?guid=ON&script=0)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: Î³-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: Î³-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFÎ²]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

