

Skip to main content

![Home](/sites/cato.org/files/cato-logo_0.png)

__

__

  * Research
  * Events
  * Publications
  * Commentary
  * Store
  * Support

  * About Cato

  * Blog
  * Our Experts
  * Our Centers
  * __Facebook
  * __Twitter

## Search form

Search this site

Policy Analysis No. 799

# Dose of Reality: The Effect of State Marijuana Legalizations

By Angela Dills, Sietse Goffard, and Jeffrey Miron

September 16, 2016

In November 2012 voters in the states of Colorado and Washington approved
ballot initiatives that legalized marijuana for recreational use. Two years
later, Alaska and Oregon followed suit. As many as 11 other states may
consider similar measures in November 2016, through either ballot initiative
or legislative action.

Supporters and opponents of such initiatives make numerous claims about state-
level marijuana legalization. Advocates think legalization reduces crime,
raises tax revenue, lowers criminal justice expenditures, improves public
health, bolsters traffic safety, and stimulates the economy. Critics argue
that legalization spurs marijuana and other drug or alcohol use, increases
crime, diminishes traffic safety, harms public health, and lowers teen
educational achievement. Systematic evaluation of these claims, however, has
been largely absent.

This paper assesses recent marijuana legalizations and related policies in
Colorado, Washington, Oregon, and Alaska.

Our conclusion is that state marijuana legalizations have had minimal effect
on marijuana use and related outcomes. We cannot rule out small effects of
legalization, and insufficient time has elapsed since the four initial
legalizations to allow strong inference. On the basis of available data,
however, we find little support for the stronger claims made by either
opponents or advocates of legalization. The absence of significant adverse
consequences is especially striking given the sometimes dire predictions made
by legalization opponents.

Continue to full version __

![](https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/styles/pdf/s3/pubs/covers/pa799.jpg?itok=XYN3Yvoa)

#### Downloads

  * __PDF (3.75 MB)
  * __EPUB (1.77 MB)
  * __MOBI (3.01 MB)

## **Introduction**

In November 2012 the states of Colorado and Washington approved ballot
initiatives that legalized marijuana for recreational use under state law. Two
years later, Alaska and Oregon followed suit.1 In November 2016 as many as 11
other states will likely consider similar measures, through either ballot
initiative or state legislative action.2

Supporters and critics make numerous claims about the effects of state-level
marijuana legalization. Advocates think that legalization reduces crime,
raises revenue, lowers criminal justice expenditure, improves public health,
improves traffic safety, and stimulates the economy.3 Critics argue that
legalization spurs marijuana and other drug or alcohol use, increases crime,
diminishes traffic safety, harms public health, and lowers teen educational
achievement.4 Systematic evaluation of those claims after legalization,
however, has been limited, particularly for Oregon and Alaska.5

This paper assesses the effect to date of marijuana legalization and related
policies in Colorado, Washington, Oregon, and Alaska.

Each of those four legalizations occurred recently, and each rolled out
gradually over several years. The data available for before and after
comparisons are therefore limited, so our assessments of legalization's effect
are tentative. Yet some post-legalization data are available, and considerable
data exist regarding earlier marijuana policy changes--such as legalization
for medical purposes--that plausibly have similar effects. Thus available
information provides a useful if incomplete perspective on what other states
should expect from legalization or related policies. Going forward, additional
data may allow stronger conclusions.

Our analysis compares the pre- and post-policy-change paths of marijuana use,
other drug or alcohol use, marijuana prices, crime, traffic accidents, teen
educational outcomes, public health, tax revenues, criminal justice
expenditures, and economic outcomes. These comparisons indicate whether the
outcomes display obvious changes in trend around the time of changes in
marijuana policy.

Our conclusion is that state-level marijuana legalizations to date have been
associated with, at most, modest changes in marijuana use and related
outcomes. Our estimates cannot rule out small changes, and related literature
finds some effects from earlier marijuana policy changes such as
medicalization. But the strong claims about legalization made by both
opponents and supporters are not apparent in the data. The absence of
significant adverse consequences is especially striking given the sometimes
dire predictions made by legalization opponents.

The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section outlines the
recent changes in marijuana policy in the four states of interest and
discusses the timing of those changes. Subsequent sections examine the
behavior of marijuana use and related outcomes before and after those policy
changes. A final section summarizes and discusses implications for upcoming
legalization debates.

## **History of State-Level Marijuana Legalizations**

Until 1913 marijuana was legal throughout the United States under both state
and federal law.6 Beginning with California in 1913 and Utah in 1914, however,
states began outlawing marijuana, and by 1930, 30 states had adopted marijuana
prohibition.7 Those state-level prohibitions stemmed largely from anti-
immigrant sentiment and in particular racial prejudice against Mexican migrant
workers, who were often associated with use of the drug. Prohibition advocates
attributed terrible crimes to marijuana and the Mexicans who smoked it,
creating a stigma around marijuana and its purported "vices."8

Meanwhile, film productions like Reefer Madness (1936) presented marijuana as
"Public Enemy Number One" and suggested that its consumption could lead to
insanity, death, and even homicidal tendencies.9

Starting in 1930, the Federal Bureau of Narcotics pushed states to adopt the
Uniform State Narcotic Act and to enact their own measures to control
marijuana distribution.10 Following the model of the National Firearms Act, in
1937 Congress passed the Marijuana Tax Act, which effectively outlawed
marijuana under federal law by imposing a prohibitive tax; even stricter
federal laws followed thereafter.11 The 1952 Boggs Act and 1956 Narcotics
Control Act established mandatory sentences for drug-related violations; a
first-time offense for marijuana possession carried a minimum sentence of 2 to
10 years in prison and a fine of up to $20,000.12 Those mandatory sentences
were mostly repealed in the early 1970s but reinstated by the Anti-Drug Abuse
Act under President Ronald Reagan. The current controlling federal legislation
is the Controlled Substances Act, which classifies marijuana as Schedule I.
This category is for drugs that, according to the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), have "no currently accepted medical use and a high
potential for abuse" as well as a risk of "potentially severe psychological or
physical dependence."13

Despite this history of increasing federal action against marijuana (and other
drugs), individual states have been backing away from marijuana prohibition
since the 1970s. Beginning with Oregon 11 states14 decriminalized possession
or use of limited amounts of marijuana between 1973 and 1978.15 A second wave
of decriminalization began with Nevada in 2001; nine more states and the
District of Columbia have since joined the list.16 Fully 25 states and the
District of Columbia have gone further by legalizing marijuana for medical
purposes. In some states, these medical regimes approximate de facto
legalization.

The most dramatic cases of undoing state prohibitions and departing from
federal policy have occurred in the four states (Colorado, Washington, Oregon,
and Alaska) that have legalized marijuana for recreational as well as medical
purposes. We next examine these four states in detail.

### **Colorado**

In 1975 Colorado became one of the first states to decriminalize marijuana
after a landmark report by the presidentially appointed Shafer Commission
recommended lower penalties against marijuana use and suggested alternative
methods to discourage heavy drug use. Decriminalization made possessing less
than an ounce of marijuana a petty offense with a $100 fine.

In November 2000 Colorado legalized medical marijuana through a statewide
ballot initiative. The proposal, known as Amendment 20 or the Medical Use of
Marijuana Act, passed with 54 percent voter support. It authorized patients
and their primary caregivers to possess up to two ounces of marijuana and up
to six marijuana plants. Patients also needed a state-issued Medical Marijuana
Registry Identification Card with a doctor's recommendation. State regulations
limited caregivers to prescribing medical marijuana to no more than five
patients each.

The number of licensed medical marijuana patients initially grew at a modest
rate. Then, in 2009, after Colorado's Board of Health abandoned the caregiver-
to-patient ratio rule, the medical marijuana industry took off.17 That same
year, in the so-called "Ogden Memo,"18 the U.S. Department of Justice signaled
it would shift resources away from state medical marijuana issues and refrain
from targeting patients and caregivers.19 Thus, although medical marijuana
remained prohibited under federal law, the federal government would tend not
to intervene in states where it was legal. Within months, medical marijuana
dispensaries proliferated. Licensed patients rose from 4,800 in 2008 to 41,000
in 2009. More than 900 dispensaries operated by the end of 2009, according to
law enforcement.20

In fall 2006 Colorado voters considered Amendment 44, a statewide ballot
initiative to legalize the recreational possession of up to one ounce of
marijuana by individuals aged 21 or older. Amendment 44 failed, with 58
percent of voters opposed.

In November 2012, however, Colorado voters passed Amendment 64 with 55 percent
support, becoming one of the first two states to relegalize recreational
marijuana. The ballot initiative authorized individuals aged 21 and older with
valid government identification to grow up to six plants and to purchase,
possess, and use up to one ounce of marijuana.21 Colorado residents could now
buy up to one ounce of marijuana in a single transaction, whereas out-of-state
residents could purchase 0.25 ounces.22

In light of Amendment 64, Colorado's government passed new regulations and
taxes to prepare for legalized recreational marijuana use. A ballot referendum
dubbed Proposition AA that was passed in November 2013 imposed a 15 percent
tax on sales of recreational marijuana from cultivators to retailers and a 10
percent tax on retail sales (in addition to the existing 2.9 percent state
sales tax on all goods). Local governments in Colorado were permitted to
impose additional taxes on retail marijuana.23

Following about a year of planning, Colorado's first retail marijuana
businesses opened on January 1, 2014. Each business was required to pay
licensing fees of several hundred dollars and adhere to other requirements.

### **Washington**

In 1971 Washington's legislature began loosening its marijuana laws and
decreed that possession of less than 40 grams would be charged as a
misdemeanor. The state legalized medical marijuana in 1998 after a 1995 court
case involving a terminal cancer patient being treated with marijuana brought
extra attention to the issue and set the stage for a citizen-driven ballot
initiative. In November 1998 state voters approved Initiative 692, known as
the Washington State Medical Use of Marijuana Act, with 59 percent in favor.
Use, possession, sale, and cultivation of marijuana became legal under state
law for patients with certain medical conditions that had been verified by a
licensed medical professional. Initiative 692 also imposed dosage limits on
the drug's use. By 2009 an estimated 35,500 Washingtonians had prescriptions
to buy medical marijuana legally.

In November 2012 Washington joined Colorado in legalizing recreational
marijuana. Voters passed ballot Initiative 502 with 56 percent in support amid
an 81 percent voter turnout at the polls. The proposal removed most state
prohibitions on marijuana manufacture and commerce, permitted limited
marijuana use for adults aged 21 and over, and established the need for a
licensing and regulatory framework to govern the state's marijuana industry.
Initiative 502 further imposed a 25 percent excise tax levied three times (on
marijuana producers, processors, and retailers) and earmarked the revenue for
research, education, healthcare, and substance-abuse prevention, among other
purposes.24

Legal possession of marijuana took effect on December 6, 2012. A year and a
half later, Washington's licensing board began accepting applications for
recreational marijuana shops. After some backlog, the first four retail stores
opened on July 8, 2014. As of June 2016, several hundred retail stores were
open across the state.

### **Oregon**

In October 1973 Oregon became the first state to decriminalize marijuana upon
passage of the Oregon Decriminalization Bill. The bill eliminated criminal
penalties for possession of up to an ounce of marijuana and downgraded the
offense from a "crime" to a "violation" with a fine of $500 to $1,000.25 State
law continued to outlaw using marijuana in public, growing or selling
marijuana, and driving under the influence. In 1997, state lawmakers attempted
to recriminalize marijuana and restore jail sentences as punishment for
possessing less than one ounce, and Oregon's governor signed the bill.
Activists gathered swiftly against the new law, however, and forced a
referendum; the attempt to recriminalize ended up failing by a margin of 2 to
1.26

Oregon medicalized marijuana by ballot initiative in November 1998, with 55
percent support. The Oregon Medical Marijuana Act legalized cultivation,
possession, and use of marijuana by prescription for patients with specific
medical conditions.27 A new organization was set up to register patients and
caregivers. In 2004 voters turned down a ballot proposal to increase to 6
pounds the amount of marijuana a patient could legally possess. Six years
later, voters also rejected an effort to permit medical marijuana
dispensaries, but the state legislature legalized them in 2013.28 As of July
2016, Oregon's medical marijuana program counted nearly 67,000 registered
patients, the vast majority claiming to suffer severe pain, persistent muscle
spasms, and nausea.29

Recreational marijuana suffered several defeats before eventual approval. In
1986 the Oregon Marijuana Legalization for Personal Use initiative failed with
74 percent of voters opposed.30 In November 2012, a similar measure also
failed, even as neighboring Washington passed its own legalization initiative.
Oregon Ballot Measure 80 would have allowed personal marijuana cultivation and
use without a license, plus unlimited possession for those over age 21. To
oversee the new market, the measure would have established an industry-
dominated board to regulate the sale of commercial marijuana. This proposal
failed with more than 53 percent of the electorate voting against it.31

Full legalization in Oregon finally passed on November 4, 2014, when voters
approved Measure 91, officially known as the Oregon Legalized Marijuana
Initiative. This measure legalized recreational marijuana for individuals over
age 21 and permitted possession of up to eight ounces of dried marijuana,
along with four plants, with the Oregon Liquor Control Commission regulating
sales of the drug. More than 56 percent of voters cast ballots in favor of the
initiative, making Oregon the third state in the nation (along with Alaska) to
legalize recreational marijuana.32

Oregon's legislature then adopted several laws to regulate the marijuana
industry. Legislators passed a 17 percent state sales tax on marijuana retail
sales and empowered local jurisdictions to charge their own additional 3
percent sales tax.33 Later, the state legislature gave individual counties the
option to ban marijuana sales if at least 55 percent of voters in those
counties opposed Measure 91.34

Legal sales went into effect on October 1, 2015. As of June 2016, Oregon had
426 locations where consumers could legally purchase recreational marijuana.35

### **Alaska**

Alaska's debate over marijuana policy began with a 1972 court case. Irwin
Ravin, an attorney, was pulled over for a broken taillight and found to be in
possession of marijuana. Ravin refused to sign the traffic ticket while he was
in possession of marijuana so that he could challenge the law. Ultimately, the
Alaska Supreme Court deemed marijuana possession in the privacy of one's home
to be constitutionally protected, and Ravin v. State established legal
precedent in Alaska for years to come.36

Alaska's legislature decriminalized marijuana in 1975, two years after Oregon.
Persons possessing less than one ounce in public--or any amount in one's own
home--could be fined no more than $100, a fine eliminated in 1982. Marijuana
opponents, however, mobilized later in the decade as law enforcement busted a
number of large, illegal cultivation sites hidden in residences. A voter
initiative in November 1990 proposed to ban possession and use of marijuana
even in one's own home, punishable by 90 days of jail time and a $1,000 fine.
The initiative passed with 54 percent support.37

In 1998 Alaska citizens spearheaded an initiative to legalize medical
marijuana, and 69 percent of voters supported it. Registered patients
consuming marijuana for health conditions certified by a doctor could possess
up to one ounce of marijuana or up to six plants.38

Advocates then turned to recreational legalization. A ballot initiative in
2000 proposed legalizing use for anyone 18 years and older and regulating the
drug "like an alcoholic beverage." The initiative failed, with 59 percent of
voters opposed. Voters considered a similar ballot measure in 2004 but again
rejected it.

A third ballot initiative on recreational marijuana legalization passed in
November 2014 with 53 percent of voters in support. It permitted adults aged
21 and over to possess, use, and grow marijuana. It also legalized manufacture
and sale. The law further created a Marijuana Control Board to regulate the
industry and establish excise taxes.

State regulators had originally planned to start issuing applications to
growers, processors, and stores in early to mid-2016. At the time of this
writing, retail marijuana shops are not yet open. This delay, along with data
limitations, makes it difficult to evaluate post-legalization outcomes in
Alaska.

## **Key Dates**

To determine the effect of marijuana legalization and similar policies on
marijuana use and related outcomes, we examine the trends in use and outcomes
before and after key policy changes. We focus mostly on recreational marijuana
legalizations, because earlier work has covered other modifications of
marijuana policy such as medicalization.39 The specific dates we consider,
derived from the discussion above, are as follows:

### **Colorado**

  * 2001, after legalization of medical marijuana

  * 2009, after liberalization of the medical marijuana law

  * 2012, after legalization of recreational marijuana

  * 2014, after the first retail stores opened under state-level legalization

### **Washington**

  * 1998, after legalization of medical marijuana

  * 2012, after legalization of recreational marijuana

  * 2014, after the first retail stores opened under state-level legalization

### **Oregon**

  * 1998, after legalization of medical marijuana

  * 2013, after the state legislature legalized medical marijuana dispensaries

  * 2014, after legalization of recreational marijuana

  * 2015, after the first retail stores opened under state-level legalization

### **Alaska**

  * 1990, after voters recriminalized marijuana

  * 1998, after legalization of medical marijuana

  * 2014, after legalization of recreational marijuana

Our analysis examines whether the trends in marijuana use and related outcomes
changed substantially after these dates. Observed changes do not necessarily
implicate marijuana policy because other factors might have changed as well.
Similarly, the absence of changes does not prove that policy changes had no
effect; the abundance of potentially confounding variables makes it possible
that, by coincidence, a policy change was approximately offset by some other
factor operating in the opposite direction. Thus, our analysis focuses on the
factual outcomes of marijuana legalization, rather than on causal inferences.

## **Drug Use**

Arguably the most important potential effect of marijuana legalization is on
marijuana use or other drug or alcohol use. Opinions differ on whether
increased use is problematic or desirable, but because other outcomes depend
on use, a key step is to determine how much policy affects use. If such
effects are small, then other effects of legalization are also likely to be
small.

Figure 1 shows past-year use rates in Colorado for marijuana and cocaine,
along with past-month use rates for alcohol.40 The key fact is that marijuana
use rates were increasing modestly for several years before 2009, when medical
marijuana became readily available in dispensaries, and continued this upward
trend through legalization in 2012. Post-legalization use rates deviate from
this overall trend, but only to a minor degree. The data do not show dramatic
changes in use rates corresponding to either the expansion of medical
marijuana or legalization. Similarly, cocaine exhibits a mild downward trend
over the time period but shows no obvious change after marijuana policy
changes. Alcohol use shows a pattern similar to marijuana: a gradual upward
trend but no obvious evidence of a response to marijuana policy.

**Figure 1. Colorado National Survey on Drug Use and Health Results (all
respondents, aged 12+)**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_1_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: National Survey on Drug Use and Health, Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration (SAMHSA),
`http://www.samhsa.gov/data/population-data-nsduh/reports?tab=33`.

Figure 2 graphs the same variables in Washington State. As in Colorado,
marijuana, cocaine, and alcohol use proceed along preexisting trends after
changes in marijuana policy.

**Figure 2. Figure 2. Washington State National Drug Survey on Drug Use and
Health Results (all respondents, aged 12+)**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_2_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: National Survey on Drug Use and Health, Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration (SAMHSA),
`http://www.samhsa.gov/data/population-data-nsduh/reports?tab=33`.

Figure 3 presents analogous data for Oregon.41 Legalization only took effect
in 2015 (i.e., after the end of currently available substance use data),
inhibiting any measurement of the effect of policy on data observed thus far.
However, as in other legalizing states, past-year marijuana use has been
rising since the mid-2000s.

**Figure 3. Oregon National Survey on Drug Use and Health Results (all
respondents, aged 12+)**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_3_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: National Survey on Drug Use and Health, Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration (SAMHSA),
`http://www.samhsa.gov/data/population-data-nsduh/reports?tab=33`.

Figure 4 presents data on current (past-month) marijuana use by youth by youth
from the Youth Risk Behavior Survey, a survey of health behaviors conducted in
middle schools and high schools. Data are unfortunately unavailable for
Washington and Oregon. The limited available data for Colorado and Alaska show
no obvious effect of legalization on youth marijuana use.

**Figure 4. Youth Risk Behavior Survey Past Month Marijuana Use**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_4_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Youth Risk Behavior Survey, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, `http://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/yrbs/data.htm`.

All those observed patterns in marijuana use might provide evidence for a
cultural explanation behind legalization: as marijuana becomes more
commonplace and less stigmatized, residents and legislators become less
opposed to legalization. In essence, rising marijuana use may not be a
consequence of legalization, but a cause of it.

Consistent with this possibility, Figure 5 plots, for all four legalizing
states, data on perceptions of "great risk" from smoking marijuana monthly.42
All four states exhibit a steady downward trend, indicating that fewer people
associate monthly marijuana use with high risk. These downward trends predate
legalization, consistent with the view that changing attitudes toward
marijuana fostered both policy changes and increasing use rates.
Interestingly, risk perceptions rose in Colorado in 2012-2013, immediately
following legalization. This rise may have resulted from public safety and
anti-legalization campaigns that cautioned residents about the dangers of
marijuana use.

**Figure 5. Perception of Risk**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_5_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: National Survey on Drug Use and Health, Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration (SAMHSA),
`http://www.samhsa.gov/data/population-data-nsduh/reports?tab=33`.

Data on marijuana prices may also shed light on marijuana use. One hypothesis
before legalization was that use might soar because prices would plunge. For
example, Dale Gieringer, director of California's NORML (National Organization
for Reform of Marijuana Laws) branch, testified in 2009 that in a "totally
unregulated market, the price of marijuana would presumably drop as low as
that of other legal herbs such as tea or tobacco--on the order of a few
dollars per ounce--100 times lower than the current prevailing price of $300
per ounce."43 A separate study by the Rand Corporation44 estimated that
marijuana prices in California would fall by 80 percent after legalization.45
Using data from Price of Weed (priceofweed.com), which crowdsources real-time
information from thousands of marijuana buyers in each state, we derive
monthly average prices of marijuana in Colorado, Washington, and Oregon.46 See
Figures 6, 7, and 8.

**Figure 6. Colorado Marijuana Prices**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_6_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Priceofweed.com,`http://www.priceofweed.com/prices/United-
States/Colorado.html`.

**Figure 7. Washington Marijuana Prices**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_7_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Priceofweed.com, `http://www.priceofweed.com/prices/United-
States/Oregon.html`.

**Figure 8. Oregon Marijuana Prices**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_8_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Priceofweed.com, `http://www.priceofweed.com/prices/United-
States/Oregon.html`.

In Colorado, monthly average prices were declining even before legalization
and have remained fairly steady since. The cost of high-quality marijuana
hovers around $230 per ounce while that of medium-quality marijuana remains
around $200. The opening of shops in January 2015 seems to have had little
effect. In Washington State, marijuana prices have been similarly steady and
have converged almost exactly to Colorado prices--roughly $230 for high-
quality marijuana and $190 for medium-quality marijuana. Oregon prices show a
rise after legalization, catching up to Colorado and Washington levels.
Although we cannot draw a conclusive picture on the basis of consumer-reported
data, the convergence of prices across states makes sense. This convergence is
also consistent with the idea that legalization helped divert marijuana
commerce from the black market to legalized retail shops.47 Overall, these
data suggest no major drop in marijuana prices after legalization and
consequently less likelihood of soaring use because of cheaper marijuana.

## **Health and Suicides**

Previous studies have suggested a link between medicalization of marijuana and
a lower overall suicide rate, particularly among demographics most likely to
use marijuana in general (males ages 20 to 39).48 In fact, supporters believe
that marijuana can be an effective treatment for bipolar disorder, depression,
and other mood disorders--not to mention a safer alternative to alcohol.
Moreover, the pain-relieving element of medical marijuana may help patients
avoid more harmful prescription painkillers and tranquilizers.49 Conversely,
certain studies suggest excessive marijuana use may increase the risk of
depression, schizophrenia, unhealthy drug abuse, and anxiety.50 Some research
also warns about long-lasting cognitive damage if marijuana is consumed
regularly, especially at a young age.51

Figure 9 displays the overall yearly suicide rate per 100,000 people in each
of the four legalizing states between 1999 and 2014.52 Figure 10 presents the
analogous suicide rate for males aged 20 through 39 years.53 Suicide rates in
all four states trend slightly upward during the 15-year-long period, but it
is difficult to see any association between marijuana legalization and any
changes in these trends. These findings contrast with many previous studies,
so it is possible that any effects will take longer to appear. In addition,
previous research has suggested a link between medical marijuana and a lower
suicide rate; it is not obvious that recreational marijuana would lead to the
same result, or that legalization of recreational marijuana after medical
marijuana is already legalized would have much of an extra effect.54M.

**Figure 9. Annual Suicide Rates (per 100,000 people)**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_9_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, CDC Wonder Portal,
http://wonder.cdc.gov/.

**Figure 10. Suicide Rates for Males 20-39 Years Old**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_10_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, CDC Wonder
Portal,`http://wonder.cdc.gov/`.

Data on treatment center admissions provide a proxy for drug abuse and other
health hazards associated with misuse. Figures 11 and 12 plot rates of annual
admissions involving marijuana and alcohol to publicly funded treatment
centers in Colorado55 and King County, Washington (which encompasses
Seattle).56 Marijuana admissions in Colorado were fairly steady over the past
decade but began falling in 2013 and 2014, just as legalization took effect.
Alcohol admissions began declining around the same time. In King County,
admissions for marijuana and alcohol continued their downward trends after
legalization. These patterns suggest that extreme growth in marijuana abuse
has not materialized, as some critics had warned before legalization.

**Figure 11. Colorado Treatment Admissions**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_11_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Rocky Mountain High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (RMHIDTA) report,
“The Legalization of Marijuana in Colorado: The Impact” (Vol. 3, September
2015), `http://
www.rmhidta.org/html/2015%20final%20legalization%20of%20marijuana%20in%20colorado%20the%20impact.pdf`.

**Figure 12. Treatment Admissions by Drug --King County, Washington**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_12_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: University of Washington Alcohol and Drug Abuse Institute,
`http://adai.washington.edu/pubs/cewg/Drug%20Trends_2014_final.pdf`.

## **Crime**

In addition to substance use and health outcomes, legalization might affect
crime. Opponents think these substances cause crime through
psychopharmacological and other mechanisms, and they note that such substances
have long been associated with crime, social deviancy, and other undesirable
aspects of society.57 Although those perspectives first emerged in the 1920s
and 1930s, marijuana's perceived associations with crime and deviancy persist
today.58

Before referendums in 2012, police chiefs, governors, policymakers, and
concerned citizens spoke up against marijuana and its purported links to
crime.59 They also argued that expanding drug commerce could increase
marijuana commerce in violent underground markets and that legalization would
make it easy to smuggle the substance across borders where it remained
prohibited, thus causing negative spillover effects.60

Proponents argue that legalization reduces crime by diverting marijuana
production and sale from the black market to legal venues. This shift may be
incomplete if high tax rates or significant regulation keeps some marijuana
activity in gray or black markets, but this merely underscores that more
legalization means less crime. At the same time, legalization may reduce the
burden on law enforcement to patrol for drug offenses, thereby freeing budgets
and manpower to address larger crimes. Legalization supporters also dispute
the claim that marijuana increases neurological tendencies toward violence or
aggression.61

Figure 13 presents monthly crime rates from Denver, Colorado, for all reported
violent crimes and property crimes.62 Both metrics remain essentially constant
after 2012 and 2014; we do not observe substantial deviations from the
illustrated cyclical crime pattern. Other cities in Colorado mirror those
findings. Analogous monthly crime data for Fort Collins, for example, reveal
no increase in violent or property crime.63

**Figure 13. Denver Monthly Crime Rate (violent and property crime rates per
100,000 residents)**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_13_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Denver Police Department, Monthly Crime Reports,
`https://www.denvergov.org/content/denvergov/en/police-department/crime-
information/crime-statistics-maps.html`. Population data source: U.S. Census
Bureau Estimates, `http://www.census.gov/popest/data/intercensal/index.html`.

Figure 14 shows monthly violent and property crime rates as reported by the
Seattle Police Department.64 Both categories of crime declined steadily over
the past 20 years, with no major deviations after marijuana liberalization.
Property crime does appear to spike in 2013 and early 2014, and some
commentators have posited that legalization drove this increase.65 That
connection is not convincing, however, since property crime starts to fall
again after the opening of marijuana shops in mid-2014. All told, crime in
Seattle has neither soared nor plummeted in the wake of legalization.66

**Figure 14. Seattle Monthly Crime Rate**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_14_rgb_hres.jpg)

Source: Seattle Police Department, Online Crime Dashboard,
`http://www.seattle.gov/seattle-police-department/crime-data/crime-dashboard`.
Population data source: U.S. Census Bureau Estimates.
`http://www.census.gov/popest/data/intercensal/index.html`.

Monthly violent and property crime remained steady after legalization in
Portland, Oregon, as seen in Figure 15.67 Portland provides an interesting
case because of its border with Washington. Between 2012 and 2014, Portland
(and the rest of Oregon) prohibited the recreational use of marijuana, while
marijuana sales and consumption were fully legal in neighboring Washingtonian
towns just to the north. This situation creates a natural experiment that
allows us to look for spillover effects in Oregon. Figure 15 suggests that
legalization in Washington and the opening of stores there did not produce
rising crime rates across the border. Elsewhere in Oregon, we see no
discernible changes in crime trends before and after legalization or medical
marijuana liberalization.68

**Figure 15. Portland Monthly Crime Rate**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_15_rgb_hres.jpg)

Source: Portland Police Bureau Neighborhood Statistics,
`http://www.portlandonline.com/police/crimestats/`. Population data source:
U.S. Census Bureau Estimates,
`http://www.census.gov/popest/data/intercensal/index.html`.

## **Road Safety**

We next evaluate how the incidence of traffic accidents may have changed in
response to marijuana policy changes. Previous literature and political
rhetoric suggest two contrasting hypotheses. One holds that legalization
increases traffic accidents by spurring drug use and thereby driving under the
influence. This hypothesis presumes that marijuana impairs driving ability.69
The opposing theory argues legalization improves traffic safety because
marijuana substitutes for alcohol, which some studies say impairs driving
ability even more.70 Moreover, some consumers may be able to drive better if
marijuana serves to relieve their pain.

Rhetoric from experts and government officials has been equally divided. Kevin
Sabet, a former senior White House drug policy adviser, warned that potential
consequences of Colorado's legalization could include large increases in
traffic accidents.71 A recent Associated Press article noted that "fatal
crashes involving marijuana doubled in Washington after legalization."72 Yet
Coloradan law enforcement agents are themselves unsure whether legal marijuana
has led to an increase in accidents.73 Research by Radley Balko, an opinion
blogger for the Washington Post and an author on drug policy, claims that,
overall, "highway fatalities in Colorado are at near-historic lows" in the
wake of legalization.74

Figure 16 presents the monthly rate of fatal accidents and fatalities per
100,000 residents in Colorado.75 No spike in fatal traffic accidents or
fatalities followed the liberalization of medical marijuana in 2009.76
Although fatality rates have reached slightly higher peaks in recent summers,
no obvious jump occurs after either legalization in 2012 or the opening of
stores in 2014.77 Likewise, neither marijuana milestone in Washington State
appears to have substantially affected the fatal crash or fatality rate, as
illustrated in figure 17.78 In fact, more granular statistics reveal that the
fatality rate for drug-related crashes was virtually unchanged after
legalization.79

Figure 18 depicts the crash fatality rate in Oregon.80 Although few post-
legalization data were available at the time of publication, we observe no
signs of deviations in trend after the opening of medical marijuana
dispensaries in 2013. We can also test for possible spillover effects from
neighboring Washington. Legalization there in 2012 and the opening of
marijuana shops in 2014 do not seem to materially affect road fatalities in
Oregon in either direction.

Finally, Figure 19 presents annual data on crash fatality rates in Alaska;
these show no discernible increase after legalization and may even decline
slightly.

**Figure 16. Colorado Car Crash Fatality Rate**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_16_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Colorado Department of Transportation,
`http://www.coloradodot.info/library/traffic/traffic-manuals-
guidelines/safety-crash-data/fatal-crash-data-city-county/fatal-crashes-by-
city-and-county/`.

**Figure 17. Washington Car Crashes and Fatality Rate**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_17_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Washington Traffic Safety Commission, Quarterly Target Zero Reports,
`http://wtsc.wa.gov/research-data/quarterly-target-zero-data/`.

**Figure 18. Oregon Car Crashes and Fatality Rate**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_18_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Oregon Department of Transportation, online Crash Summary Reports and
in-person data request. Special thanks to Theresa Heyn and Coleen O'Hogan,
`http://www.oregon.gov/ODOT/TD/TDATA/pages/car/car_publications.aspx`.

**Figure 19. Alaska Car Crashes and Fatalities**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_19_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Alaska Highway Safety Office,
`http://www.dot.state.ak.us/stwdplng/hwysafety/fars.shtml`.

## **Youth Outcomes**

Much of the concern surrounding marijuana legalization relates to its possible
effect on youths. Many observers, for example, fear that expanded legal access
\--even if officially limited to adults age 21 and over--might increase use by
teenagers, with negative effects on intelligence, educational outcomes, or
other youth behaviors.81, 82

Figure 20 displays the total number of school suspensions and drug-related
suspensions in Colorado public high schools during each academic year.83 Total
suspensions trend downward over time, with a slight bump after 2014, but that
bump was not one driven by drug-related causes. Drug-related suspensions
appear to rise after medical marijuana commercialization in 2009 but stay
level after full legalization and the opening of retail shops. Figure 21 shows
public high school expulsions, both overall and drug-related. It reveals a
parallel bump in drug-related expulsions right after marijuana liberalization
in 2009, but expulsions drop steeply thereafter. In fact, by 2014, expulsions
drop back to their previous levels.

**Figure 20. School Suspensions --Colorado**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_20_rgb_hres.jpg)

Source: Colorado Department of Education, 10-Year Trend Data,
`http://www.cde.state.co.us/cdereval/suspend-expelcurrent`.

**Figure 21. School Expulsions --Colorado**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_21_gs_lres.jpg)

Source: Colorado Department of Education, 10-Year Trend Data,
`http://www.cde.state.co.us/cdereval/suspend-expelcurrent`.

We also consider potential effects on academic performance. Standardized test
scores measuring the reading proficiency of 8th and 10th graders in Washington
State show no indication of significant positive or negative changes caused by
legalization, as illustrated in Figure 22.84 Although some studies have found
that frequent marijuana use impedes teen cognitive development, our results do
not suggest a major change in use, thereby implying no major changes in
testing performance.

**Figure 22. Washington Standardized Test Scores**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_22_gs_lres.jpg)

Source: Washington State Office of the Superintendent of Public Instruction,
http://reportcard.ospi.k12.wa.us/.

## **Economic Outcomes**

Changing economic and demographic outcomes are unlikely to be significant
effects of marijuana legalization, simply because marijuana is a small part of
the overall economy. Nevertheless, we consider this outcome for completeness.
Before legalization, many advocates thought that legalization could drive a
robust influx of residents, particularly young individuals enticed to move
across state lines to take advantage of loose marijuana laws. More recently,
various news articles say housing prices in Colorado (particularly around
Denver) are soaring at growth rates far above the national average, perhaps as
a consequence of marijuana legalization. One analyst went so far as to say
that marijuana has essentially "kick-started the recovery of the industrial
market in Denver" and led to record-high rent levels.85

Figure 23 sheds doubt on these extreme claims by presenting the Case-Shiller
Home Price Index for Denver, Seattle, and Portland, along with the national
average.86 Data show that home prices in all three cities have been rising
steadily since mid-2011, with no apparent booms after marijuana policy
changes. Housing prices in Denver did rise at a robust rate after January
2014, when marijuana shops opened, but this increase was in step with the
national average.

**Figure 23. Case Shiller Home Price Index**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_23_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: S&P Core Logic Case-Shiller Home Price Indices,
`http://us.spindices.com/index-family/real-estate/sp-corelogic-case-shiller`.

Furthermore, marijuana legalization in all four legalizing states had, at
most, a trivial effect on population growth.87 Whereas some people may have
moved across states for marijuana purposes, any resulting growth in population
has been small and unlikely to cause noticeable increases in housing prices or
total economic output.

Advocates also argue that legalization boosts economic activity by creating
jobs in the marijuana sector, including "marijuana tourism" and other support
industries, thereby boosting economic output.88 Marijuana production and
commerce do employ many thousands of people, and Colorado data provide some
hint of a measurable effect on employment. As Figure 24 indicates, the
seasonally adjusted unemployment rate began to fall more dramatically after
the start of 2014, which coincides with the opening of marijuana stores.89
These gains, however, have yet to be seen in Washington, Oregon, and Alaska.
One hypothesis may be that Colorado, as the first state to open retail shops,
benefitted from a "first mover advantage." If more states legalize, any
employment gains will become spread out more broadly, and marijuana tourism
may diminish.

**Figure 24. Unemployment Rates**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_24_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Local Area Unemployment Statistics,
`http://www.bls.gov/lau/`.

Note: Rates are seasonally adjusted.

**Figure 25. Marijuana Tax Revenues --Colorado (all values are nominal)**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_25_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Colorado Department of Revenue,
`https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/revenue/colorado-marijuana-tax-data`.

**Figure 26. Marijuana Tax Revenues --Washington (all values are nominal)**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_26_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: Washington State Department of Revenue,
`http://dor.wa.gov/Content/AboutUs/StatisticsAndReports/stats_MMJTaxes.aspx;
Initiative 502 Data, http://www.502data.com/`.

**Figure 27. State Correctional Expenditures (all values are nominal)**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_27_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: United States Census Bureau, American FactFinder Database,
`http://factfinder.census.gov/`.

**Figure 28. State Police Protection Expenditures (all values are nominal)**

![](http://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/figure_28_rgb_lres.jpg)

Source: United States Census Bureau, American FactFinder
Database,`http://factfinder.census.gov/`.

Data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis show little evidence of significant
gross domestic product (GDP) increases after legalization in any state.90
Although it is hard to disentangle marijuana-related economic activity from
broader economic trends, the surges in economic output predicted by some
proponents have not yet materialized. Similarly, no clear changes have
occurred in GDP per capita.

One area where legal marijuana has reaped unexpectedly large benefits is state
tax revenue. Colorado, Washington, and Oregon all impose significant excise
taxes on recreational marijuana, along with standard state sales taxes, other
local taxes, and licensing fees. As seen in Figure 25, Colorado collects well
over $10 million per month from recreational marijuana alone.91 In 2015 the
state generated a total of $135 million in recreational marijuana revenue, $35
million of which was earmarked for school construction projects. These figures
are above some pre-legalization forecasts, although revenue growth was
disappointingly sluggish during the first few months of sales.92 A similar
story has unfolded in Washington, as illustrated in Figure 26, where
recreational marijuana generated approximately $70 million in tax revenue in
the first year of sales93--double the original revenue forecast.94 Oregon only
began taxing recreational marijuana in January 2016, so data are still
preliminary; however, state officials report revenues of $14.9 million so far,
well above the initial estimate of $2.0 million to $3.0 million for the entire
calendar year95 The tax revenues in these states may decline.

Limited post-legalization data prevent us from ruling out small changes in
marijuana use or other outcomes. As additional post-legalization data become
available, expanding this analysis will continue to inform the debate. The
data so far provide little support for the strong claims about legalization
made by either opponents or supporters.

## Notes

1\. In November 2014, the District of Columbia voted overwhelmingly in favor
of Initiative 71, which legalized the use, possession, and cultivation of
limited amounts of marijuana in the privacy of one's home. It also permitted
adults age 21 and over to "gift"--or transfer--up to two ounces of marijuana
provided no payment or other exchange of goods or services occurred. Selling
marijuana or consuming it in public, however, remain criminal violations. In
addition, because of ongoing federal prohibition, marijuana remains illegal on
federal land, which makes up 30 percent of the District. Therefore, we do not
examine data for D.C. For more, see `http://mpdc.dc.gov/marijuana`.

2\. In June 2016, the California secretary of state announced that a ballot
referendum on marijuana legalization would occur in November, after a state
campaign amassed enough signatures to put the question to a vote. Other likely
candidates include Arizona, Florida, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri,
Nevada, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont. Organizations and private
citizens in additional states have raised the idea of ballot initiatives but
have not yet garnered the requisite signatures to hold a vote. See Jackie
Salo, "Marijuana Legalization 2016: Which States Will Consider Cannabis This
Year," International Business Times, December 30, 2015,
`http://www.ibtimes.com/marijuana-legalization-2016-which-states-will-
consider-cannabis-year-2245024`.

3\. Ethan Nadelmann, for example, has asserted that legalization is a "smart"
move that will help end mass incarceration and undermine illicit criminal
organizations. See Nadelmann, "Marijuana Legalization: Not If, But When,"
HuffingtonPost.com, November 3, 2010, `http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ethan-
nadelmann/marijuana-legalization-no_b_778222.html`.Former New Mexico governor
and current Libertarian Party presidential candidate Gary Johnson has also
advocated marijuana legalization, predicting that the measure will lead to
less overall substance abuse because individuals addicted to alcohol or other
substances will find marijuana a safer alternative. See Kelsey Osterman, "Gary
Johnson: Legalizing Marijuana Will Lead to Lower Overall Substance Abuse,"
RedAlertPolitics.com, April 24, 2013,
`http://redalertpolitics.com/2013/04/24/gary-johnson-legalizing-marijuana-
will-lead-to-less-overall-substance-abuse/`.Denver Police Chief Robert White
argues that violent crime dropped almost 9 percent in 2012. See Sadie Gurman,
"Denver's Top Law Enforcement Officials Disagree: Is Crime Up or Down?" Denver
Post, January 22, 2014, `http://www.denverpost.com/2014/01/22/denvers-top-law-
enforcement-officers-disagree-is-crime-up-or-down/`.

4\. Colorado governor John Hickenlooper (D) opposed initial efforts to
legalize marijuana because he thought the policy would, among other things,
increase the number of children using drugs. See Matt Ferner, "Gov. John
Hickenlooper Opposes Legal Weed," HuffingtonPost.com, September 12, 2012,
`http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/09/12/gov-john-hickenlooper-
opp_n_1879248.html`. Former U.S. attorney general Edwin Meese III, who is now
the Heritage Foundation's Ronald Reagan Distinguished Fellow Emeritus, and
Charles Stimson have argued that violent crime surges when marijuana is
legally abundant and that the economic burden of legalization far outstrips
the gain. See Meese and Stimson, "The Case against Legalizing Marijuana in
California," Heritage Foundation, October 3, 2010,
`http://www.heritage.org/research/commentary/2010/10/the-case-against-
legalizing-marijuana-in-california`. Kevin Sabet, a former senior White House
drug policy adviser in the Obama administration, has called Colorado's
marijuana legalization a mistake, warning that potential consequences may
include high addiction rates, spikes in traffic accidents, and reductions in
IQ. See Sabet, "Colorado Will Show Why Legalizing Marijuana Is a Mistake,"
Washington Times, January 17, 2014,
`http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2014/jan/17/sabet-marijuana-
legalizations-worst-enemy/`. The former director of the Drug Enforcement
Administration, John Walters, claims that "what we [see] in Colorado has the
markings of a drug use epidemic." He argues that there is now a thriving black
market in marijuana in Colorado and that more research on marijuana's societal
effects needs to be completed before legalization should be considered. See
Walters, "The Devastation That's Really Happening in Colorado," Weekly
Standard, July 10, 2014, `http://www.weeklystandard.com/the-devastation-thats-
really-happening-in-colorado/article/796308`. John Walsh, the U.S. attorney
for Colorado, defended the targeted prosecution of medical marijuana
dispensaries located near schools by citing figures from the Colorado
Department of Education showing dramatic increases in drug-related school
suspensions, expulsions, and law enforcement referrals between 2008 and 2011.
See John Ingold, "U.S. Attorney John Walsh Justifies Federal Crackdown on
Medical-Marijuana Shops," Denver Post, January 20, 2012,
`http://www.denverpost.com/2012/01/19/u-s-attorney-john-walsh-justifies-
federal-crackdown-on-medical-marijuana-shops-2/`. Denver District Attorney
Mitch Morrissey points to the 9 percent rise in felony cases submitted to his
office during the 2008-11 period, after Colorado's marijuana laws had been
partially liberalized, as evidence of marijuana's social effects. See Sadie
Gurman, "Denver's Top Law Enforcement Officials Disagree: Is Crime Up or
Down?" Denver Post, January 22, 2014,
`http://www.denverpost.com/2014/01/22/denvers-top-law-enforcement-officers-
disagree-is-crime-up-or-down/`. Other recent news stories that report
criticisms of marijuana liberalization include Jack Healy, "After 5 Months of
Legal Sale, Colorado Sees the Downside of a Legal High," _New York Times_ ,
May 31, 2014, `http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/01/us/after-5-months-of-sales-
colorado-sees-the-downside-of-a-legal-high.html`, and Josh Voorhees, "Going to
Pot, Slate.com, May 21, 2014,
`http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/05/colorado_s_pot_experiment_the_unintended_consequences_of_marijuana_legalization.html`.
Also, White House policy research indicates that marijuana is the drug most
often linked to crime. See Rob Hotakainen, "Marijuana Is Drug Most Often
Linked to Crime," McClatchy News Service, May 23, 2013,
`http://www.mcclatchydc.com/news/politics-government/article24749413.html`.

5\. MacCoun et al. (2009) review the decriminalization literature from the
first wave of decriminalizations in the 1970s, noting a lack of response. See
MacCoun, et al., "Do Citizens Know Whether Their State Has Decriminalized
Marijuana? Assessing the Perceptual Component of Deterrence Theory." Review of
Law and Economics 5 (2009): 347-71. Analysis of the recent U.S. state
legalizations is more limited. Some noteworthy studies include Jeffrey Miron,
"Marijuana Policy in Colorado," Cato Institute Working Paper no. 24, 2014;
Andrew A. Monte et al., "The Implications of Marijuana Legalization in
Colorado," Journal of the American Medical Association 313, no. 3 (2015):
241-42; Stacy Salomonsen-Sautel et al., "Trends in Fatal Motor Vehicle Crashes
Before and After Marijuana Commercialization in Colorado," Drug and Alcohol
Dependence 140 (2014): 137-44, which found a statistically significant uptick
in drivers involved in a fatal motor vehicle crash after commercialization of
medical marijuana in Colorado; Beau Kilmer et al., "Altered State?: Assessing
How Marijuana Legalization in California Could Influence Marijuana Consumption
and Public Budgets," Occasional Paper, Rand Drug Policy Research Center, Santa
Monica, CA, 2010; Angela Hawken et al., "Quasi-Legal Cannabis in Colorado and
Washington: Local and National Implications," Addiction 108, no. 5 (2013):
837-38; and Howard S. Kim et al., "Marijuana Tourism and Emergency Department
Visits in Colorado," New England Journal of Medicine, 374 (2016): 797-98.For
an analysis of whether Colorado has implemented its legalization in a manner
consistent with the law, see John Hudak, "Colorado's Rollout of Legal
Marijuana Is Succeeding," Governance Studies Series, Brookings Institution,
Washington, D.C., July 31, 2014,
`http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/papers/2014/07/colorado-
marijuana-legalization-succeeding/cepmmjcov2.pdf`. International evidence from
Portugal (Glenn Greenwald, "Drug Decriminalization in Portugal," Cato
Institute White Paper, 2009,
`http://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/greenwald_whitepaper.pdf`),
the Netherlands (Robert J. MacCoun, "What can we learn from the Dutch cannabis
coffeeshop system," Addiction 2011: 1-12 and Ali Palali and Jan C. van Ours,
"Distance to Cannabis Shops and Age of Onset of Cannabis Use," Health
Economics 24, no. 11 (2015): 1482-1501, parts of Australia (Jenny Williams and
Anne Line Bretteville-Jensen, "Does Liberalizing Cannabis Laws Increase
Cannabis Use?" Journal of Health Economics 36 (2014): 20-32) and parts of
London (Nils Braakman and Simon Jones, "Cannabis Depenalization, Drug
Consumption and Crime--Evidence from the 2004 Cannabis Declassification in the
UK," Social Science and Medicine 115 (2014): 29-37) suggest little to no
effects of these laws on drug use. Jérôme Adda et al., "Crime and the
Depenalization of Cannabis Possession: Evidence from a Policing Experiment,"
Journal of Political Economy 122, no. 5 (2014): 1130-1201 consider
depenalization in a London borough, finding declines in crime caused by the
police shifting enforcement to non-drug crime.

6\. Opium, cocaine, coca leaves, and other derivatives of coca and opium had
been essentially outlawed in 1914 by the Harrison Narcotic Act. See C. E.
Terry, "The Harrison Anti-Narcotic Act," American Journal of Public Health 5,
no. 6 (1915): 518,
`http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1286619/?page=1`.

7\. "When and Why Was Marijuana Outlawed," _Schaffer Library of Drug Policy_ ,
`http://druglibrary.org/schaffer/library/mj_outlawed.htm`.

8\. Ibid.

9\. Mathieu Deflem, ed., Popular Culture, Crime, and Social Control, vol. 14,
Sociology of Crime, Law and Deviance, (Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing,
2010), p. 13, `https://goo.gl/ioAoVY`.

10\. Kathleen Ferraiolo, "From Killer Weed to Popular Medicine: The Evolution
of Drug Control Policy, 1937-2000," The Journal of Policy History 19 (2007):
147-79, `https://muse.jhu.edu/article/217587`.

11\. David Musto, "Opium, Cocaine and Marijuana in American History,"
Scientific American 20-27 (July 1991),
`http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1882226`.

12\. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, "Traffic in Narcotics,
Barbiturates and Amphetamines in the United States,"
`https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-
analysis/bulletin/bulletin_1956-01-01_3_page005.html`.

13\. "Drug Schedules," U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration,
`https://www.dea.gov/druginfo/ds.shtml`.

14\. The 11 states were Oregon (1973), Alaska (1975), California (1975),
Colorado (1975), Maine (1975), Minnesota (1976), Ohio (1976), Mississippi
(1977), New York (1977), North Carolina (1977), and Nevada (1978). See Rosalie
Pacula et al., "Marijuana Decriminalization: What Does It Mean for the United
States?" (National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 9690, NBER
and RAND Corporation, Cambridge, MA, January 2004),
`http://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/working_papers/2004/RAND_WR126.pdf`.

15\. Not all states followed such a straightforward path towards marijuana
liberalization. Alaska, for example, decriminalized marijuana use and
possession in one's home in 1975. In 1990, however, a voter initiative
recriminalized possession and use of marijuana. See the section on Alaska for
more details.

16\. "States That Have Decriminalized," National Organization for the Reform
of Marijuana Laws, `http://norml.org/aboutmarijuana/item/states-that-have-
decriminalized`.

17\. "The Legalization of Marijuana in Colorado: The Impact. A Preliminary
Report," Rocky Mountain HIDTA, 1 (August 2013): 3,
`http://www.rmhidta.org/html/final%20legalization%20of%20mj%20in%20colorado%20the%20impact.pdf`.

18\. David Ogden, the deputy attorney general at the time, issued a memorandum
stating it would be unwise to "focus federal resources … on individuals whose
actions are in clear and unambiguous compliance with existing state law
providing for the medical use of marijuana." See "Memorandum for Selected
United State Attorneys on Investigations and Prosecutions in States
Authorizing the Medical Use of Marijuana," U.S. Department of Justice, October
19, 2009. `https://www.justice.gov/opa/blog/memorandum-selected-united-state-
attorneys-investigations-and-prosecutions-states`.

19\. The Ogden Memorandum did not permanently resolve confusion about the role
of federal law in state marijuana policy. In 2011, the Department of Justice
issued another memo entitled the "Cole Memo" which somewhat backpedaled on the
Ogden Memo's position; it cautioned that "the Ogden Memorandum was never
intended to shield such activities from federal enforcement action and
prosecution, even where those activities purport to comply with state law." It
was not until 2013 when those in the marijuana industry received a clear
answer. A third memo unambiguously outlined the eight scenarios in which
federal authorities would enforce marijuana laws in states where the substance
was legal. Beyond those eight priorities, the federal government would leave
marijuana law enforcement to local authorities. For more, see "Guidance
Regarding the Ogden Memo in Jurisdictions Seeking to Authorize Marijuana for
Medical Use," U.S. Department of Justice, June 29, 2011,
`https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/oip/legacy/2014/07/23/dag-
guidance-2011-for-medical-marijuana-use.pdf`. See also "Guidance Regarding
Marijuana Enforcement," U.S. Department of Justice, August 29, 2013,
`https://www.justice.gov/iso/opa/resources/3052013829132756857467.pdf`.

20\. "The Legalization of Marijuana in Colorado: The Impact. A Preliminary
Report," Rocky Mountain HIDTA 1 (August 2013): 4,
`http://www.rmhidta.org/html/final%20legalization%20of%20mj%20in%20colorado%20the%20impact.pdf`.

21\. "Amendment 64: Use and Regulation of Marijuana," City of Fort Collins,
Colorado, `http://www.fcgov.com/mmj/pdf/amendment64.pdf`.

22\. Ibid.

23\. Numerous counties, including Denver County and others, have enacted local
taxes on top of state taxes. In Denver, retail marijuana products are subject
to a local sales tax of 3.65 percent in addition to a special marijuana tax of
3.5 percent. See "City and County of Denver, Colorado: Tax Guide, Topic No.
95," City of Denver (revised April 2015),
`https://www.denvergov.org/Portals/571/documents/TaxGuide/Marijuana-
Medical_and_Retail.pdf`.

24\. This system of three separate taxes was eventually replaced by a single,
37 percent excise tax levied at the retail point of sale in July 2015. See
"FAQs on Taxes," Washington State Liquor and Cannabis Board,
`http://www.liq.wa.gov/mj2015/faqs-on-taxes`. See also Rachel La Corte,
"Washington State Pot Law Overhaul: Marijuana Tax Reset at 37 Percent,"
Associated Press, The Cannabist, July 1, 2015,
`http://www.thecannabist.co/2015/07/01/washington-state-pot-law-overhaul-
marijuana-tax-reset-at-37-percent/37238/`.

25\. "State by State Laws: Oregon," National Organization for the Reform of
Marijuana Laws, 2006, `http://norml.org/laws/item/oregon-penalties-2`.

26\. See "Oregon Legislature Ends 24 Years of Marijuana Decriminalization,"
National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, news release, July 3,
1997, `http://norml.org/news/1997/07/03/oregon-legislature-ends-24-years-of-
marijuana-decriminalization/`. See also "State by State Laws: Oregon,"
National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws, 2006.

27\. "Medical Marijuana Rules and Statutes: Oregon Medical Marijuana Act,"
Oregon Health Authority, June 2016,
`http://public.health.oregon.gov/DiseasesConditions/ChronicDisease/MedicalMarijuanaProgram/Pages/legal.aspx#ors`.

28\. "Oregon Medical Marijuana Allowance Measure 33 (2004)," Ballotpedia,
`https://ballotpedia.org/Oregon_Medical_Marijuana_Allowance_Measure_33_(2004)`.

29\. "Oregon Medical Marijuana Program Statistics," Oregon Health Authority,
July 2016,
`https://public.health.oregon.gov/diseasesconditions/chronicdisease/medicalmarijuanaprogram/pages/data.aspx`.

30\. "Oregon Marijuana Legalization for Personal Use, Ballot Measure 5
(1986)," Ballotpedia,
`https://ballotpedia.org/Oregon_Marijuana_Legalization_for_Personal_Use,_Ballot_Measure_5_(1986)`.

31\. "Oregon Cannabis Tax Act Initiative, Measure 80 (2012)," Ballotpedia,
`https://ballotpedia.org/Oregon_Cannabis_Tax_Act_Initiative,_Measure_80_(2012)`.

32\. "Measure 91," Oregon Liquor Control Commission,
`https://www.oregon.gov/olcc/marijuana/Documents/Measure91.pdf`.

33\. Several counties in Oregon have enacted their own local taxes.

34\. As of June 2016, 87 municipalities and 19 counties in Oregon had
prohibited recreational marijuana businesses or producers in their
jurisdiction. See "Record of Cities/Counties Prohibiting Licensed Recreational
Marijuana Facilities," Oregon Liquor Control Commission,
`https://www.oregon.gov/olcc/marijuana/Documents/Cities_Counties_RMJOptOut.pdf`.

35\. "Medical Marijuana Dispensary Directory," Oregon Health Authority
`http://www.oregon.gov/oha/mmj/Pages/directory.aspx`.

36\. _Ravin v. State_ , 537 F.2d 494 (Alaska 1975).

37\. "Alaska Marijuana Criminalization Initiative, Measure 2 (1990),"
Ballotpedia,
`https://ballotpedia.org/Alaska_Marijuana_Criminalization_Initiative_Measure_2_(1990)`.

38\. "Ballot Measure 8: Bill Allowing Medical Use of Marijuana," Alaska
Division of Elections,
`http://www.elections.alaska.gov/doc/oep/1998/98bal8.htm`.

39\. Recent work includes the following: D. Mark Anderson et al., "Medical
Marijuana Laws and Suicides by Gender and Age," American Journal of Public
Health 104, no. 1 (December 2014): 2369-76; D. Mark Anderson et al., "Medical
Marijuana Laws and Teen Marijuana Use," American Law and Economic Review 17,
no. 2 (2015): 495-528; Choo, Esther K et al., "The Impact of State Medical
Marijuana Legislation on Adolescent Marijuana Use," Journal of Adolescent
Health, forthcoming.Yu-Wei Luke Chu, "Do Medical Marijuana Laws Increase Hard-
Drug Use?" Journal of Law and Economics 58, no. 2 (May 2015): 481-517; Gorman,
Dennis M. and J. Charles Huber, Jr. "Do Medical Cannabis Laws Encourage
Cannabis Use?" The International Journal of Drug Policy 18, no. 3 (May 2007):
160-67; S. Harper et al., "Do Medical Marijuana Laws Increase Marijuana Use?
Replication Study and Extension," Annals of Epidemiology 22(2012): 207-212;
Sarah D. Lynne-Landsman et al., "Effects of State Medical Marijuana Laws on
Adolescent Marijuana Use," American Journal of Public Health, 103 (2013):
1500-1506; Karen O'Keefe and Mitch Earleywine, "Marijuana Use by Young People:
The Impact of State Medical Marijuana Laws," manuscript, Marijuana Policy
Project (2011) and Hefei Wen et al., "The Effect of Medical Marijuana Laws on
Marijuana, Alcohol, and Hard Drug Use," NBER Working Paper no. 20085, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, 2014, which found that medical
marijuana laws led to a relatively small increase in marijuana use by adults
over age 21 and did nothing to change use of hard drugs.Rosalie Liccardo
Pacula et al., "Assessing the Effects of Medical Marijuana Laws on Marijuana
and Alcohol Use: The Devil Is in the Details," NBER Working Paper no. 19302,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, 2015, found that
legalizing home cultivation and medical marijuana dispensaries were associated
with higher marijuana use, while other aspects of medical marijuana
liberalization were not.Choo et al., "The Impact of State Medical Marijuana
Legislation on Adolescent Marijuana Use," Journal of Adolescent Health 55, no.
2 (2014): 160-66, found no statistically significant differences in adolescent
marijuana use after state-level medical marijuana legalization.

40\. Data are reported as two-year averages. Data are from "National Survey on
Drug Use and Health 2002-2014," Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and
Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration,
`http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/content/SAMHDA/help/nsduh-
estimates.html`.

41\. No post-legalization data were available for Alaska.

42\. State-level data from "National Survey on Drug Use and Health,
2002-2014," Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality.

43\. Dale H. Gieringer, director, California NORML, "Testimony on the
Legalization of Marijuana," Testimony before the California Assembly Committee
on Public Safety, October 28, 2009,
`http://norml.org/pdf_files/AssPubSafety_Legalization.pdf`.

44\. Rand Corporation, "Legalizing Marijuana in California Would Sharply Lower
the Price of the Drug," news release, July 7, 2007,
`http://www.rand.org/news/press/2010/07/07.html`.

45\. These analyses consider legalization at both the federal and state levels
which would allow additional avenues for lower prices such as economies of
scale, although also additional avenues for higher prices because of federal
taxation and advertising.

46\. The website Price of Weed allows anyone to submit anonymous data about
the price, quantity, and quality of marijuana he or she purchases, as well as
where the marijuana was purchased. Founded in 2010, the website has logged
hundreds of thousands of entries across the country, and many analysts and
journalists look to it as a source of marijuana price data. It has obvious
limitations: the data are not a random sample; the consumer reports do not
distinguish between marijuana bought through legal means and through the black
market; self-reported data may not be accurate; and the data are probably from
a self-selecting crowd of marijuana enthusiasts. Nevertheless, Price of Weed
provides large samples of real-time data. To reduce the impact of inaccurate
submissions, the website automatically removes the bottom and top 5 percent of
outliers when calculating its average prices. We were not able to calculate
meaningful marijuana price averages from Alaska because of a relatively low
number of entries from that state.

47\. One further trend we observe in all three states is a widening price gap
between high-quality and medium-quality marijuana. Among other things, this
gap may be the result of fewer information asymmetries in the marijuana
market. On the black market, it can be hard to know the true quality of a
product. Marijuana trade is complex, with hundreds of different strains and
varieties. Yet in the black market, consumers often have a difficult time
differentiating between them and may end up paying similarly high prices for
medium- and high-quality marijuana. In all three states, the gap between the
prices rose after legalization, suggesting that consumers have had an easier
time distinguishing between different qualities and strains of marijuana.

48\. Anderson, Rees, and Sabia, "Medical Marijuana Laws and Suicides by Gender
and Age."

49\. D. Mark Anderson et al., "High on Life?: Medical Marijuana and Suicide,"
Cato Institute Research Briefs in Economic Policy, no. 17, January 2015,
`http://www.southerncannabis.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/marijuana-suicide-
study.pdf`. David Powell et al., "Do Medical Marijuana Laws Reduce Addictions
and Deaths Related to Pain Killers?" NBER Working Paper no. 21345, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, July 2015.

50\. See, for example, Zammit et al., "Self-reported Cannabis Use as a Risk
Factor for Schizophrenia in Swedish Conscripts of 1969," British Medical
Journal, 325 (2002); Henquet et al., "Prospective Cohort Study of Cannabis
Use, Predisposition for Psychosis, and Psychotic Symptoms in Young People,"
British Medical Journal, (December 2004) ; Goldberg, "Studies Link Psychosis,
Teenage Marijuana Use," Boston Globe, January 26, 2006; Shulman, "Marijuana
Linked to Heart Disease and Depression," U.S. News, May 14, 2008.See also Jan
C. van Ours et al., "Cannabis Use and Suicidal Ideation," Journal of Health
Economics 32, no. 3 (2013): 524-37; Jan C. van Ours and Jenny Williams, "The
Effects of Cannabis Use on Physical and Mental Health," Journal of Health
Economics 31, no. 4 (July 2012): 564-77; Jan C. van Ours and Jenny Williams,
"Cannabis Use and Mental Health Problems," Journal of Applied Econometrics 26,
no. 7 (November 2011): 1137-56; and Jenny Williams and Christopher L. Skeels,
"The Impact of Cannabis Use on Health," De Economist 154, no. 4 (December
2006): 517-46.

51\. National Institute on Drug Abuse, "What Are Marijuana's Long-Term Impacts
on the Brain?" Research Report Series, March 2016,
`https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/research-reports/marijuana/how-does-
marijuana-use-affect-your-brain-body`. Kelly and Rasul evaluate the
depenalization of marijuana in a London borough and find large increases in
hospital admissions related to hard drug use, particularly among younger men.
See Elaine Kelly and Imran Rasul, "Policing Cannabis and Drug Related Hospital
Admissions: Evidence from Administrative Records," Journal of Public Economics
112 (April 2014): 89-114.

52\. "Detailed Mortality Statistics," Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, WONDER Online Databases, `http://wonder.cdc.gov/`.

53\. Ibid.

54\. The link between medical marijuana and lower suicide rates may stem
partly from the fact that medical marijuana can substitute for other, more
dangerous painkillers and opiates. Research by Anne Case and Angus Deaton
found suicides and drug poisonings led to a marked increase in mortality rates
of middle-aged white non-Hispanic men and women in the United States between
1999 and 2013. Other studies have linked opioid and painkiller overdoses to a
recent surge in self-inflicted drug-related deaths and suicides. Medical
marijuana, as a less risky pain reliever, may thus help lessen the rate of
drug deaths and suicides. For more, see Case and Deaton, "Rising Morbidity and
Mortality in Midlife among White Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century,"
National Academy of Sciences 112, no. 49 (November 2015),
`http://www.pnas.org/content/112/49/15078`.

55\. Kevin Wong and Chelsey Clarke, The Legalization of Marijuana in Colorado:
The Impact Vol. 3 (Denver: Rocky Mountain High Intensity Drug Trafficking
Area, September 2015),
`http://www.rmhidta.org/html/2015%20final%20legalization%20of%20marijuana%20in%20colorado%20the%20impact.pdf`.

56\. Caleb Banta-Green et al., "Drug Abuse Trends in the Seattle-King Country
Area: 2014," Report, University of Washington Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Institute, Seattle, June 17, 2015,
`http://adai.washington.edu/pubs/cewg/Drug%20Trends_2014_final.pdf`.

57\. David Musto, "Opium, Cocaine and Marijuana in American History,"
Scientific American 265, no. 1 (July 1991): 40-47,
`http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1882226`.

58\. U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, "The Dangers and Consequences of
Marijuana Abuse," U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, DC, May 2014, p. 24,
`https://www.dea.gov/docs/dangers-consequences-marijuana-abuse.pdf`.

59\. For example, Sheriff David Weaver of Douglas County, Colorado, warned in
2012, "Expect more crime, more kids using marijuana, and pot for sale
everywhere." See Matt Ferner, "If Legalizing Marijuana Was Supposed to Cause
More Crime, It's Not Doing a Very Good Job," T _he Huffington Post_ , July 17,
2014, `http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/07/17/marijuana-crime-
denver_n_5595742.html`.

60\. Jeffrey Miron, "Marijuana Policy in Colorado," Cato Institute Working
Paper, October 23, 2014,
`http://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/working-paper-24_2.pdf`.

61\. "Marijuana Is Safer Than Alcohol: It's Time to Treat It That Way,"
Marijuana Policy Project, Washington, DC, `https://www.mpp.org/marijuana-is-
safer/.` See also Peter Hoaken and Sherry Stewart, "Drugs of Abuse and the
Elicitation of Human Aggressive Behavior," Addictive Behaviors 28: (2003):
1533-54, `http://www.ukcia.org/research/AgressiveBehavior.pdf`.

62\. Denver Police Department, Uniform Crime Reporting Program, "Monthly
Citywide Data--National Incident-Based Reporting System,"
`http://www.denvergov.org/police/PoliceDepartment/CrimeInformation/CrimeStatisticsMaps/tabid/441370/Default.aspx`

63\. Fort Collins crime data yield similar factual conclusions, showing no
consistent rise in crime following either the November 2012 legalization or
the January 2014 opening of stores.

64\. "Crime Dashboard," Seattle Police Department,
`http://www.seattle.gov/seattle-police-department/crime-data/crime-dashboard`.

65\. Sierra Rayne, "Seattle's Post-Marijuana Legalization Crime Wave,"
American Thinker, November 13, 2015,
`http://www.americanthinker.com/blog/2015/11/seattles_postmarijuana_legalization_crime_wave.html`

.

66\. Elsewhere in Washington State, this conclusion seems equally robust.
Tacoma, a large city in northeastern Washington where stores have opened, has
generally seen stable crime trends before and after legalization. Total
monthly offenses, violent crime, and property crime have shown no significant
deviation from their recent trends. See Kellie Lapczynski, "Tacoma Monthly
Crime Data," Washington Association of Sheriffs and Police Chiefs, 2015,
p377-78,
`http://www.waspc.org/assets/CJIS/crime%20in%20washington%202015.small.pdf`.

67\. "City of Portland--Neighborhood Crime Statistics," Portland Police
Bureau, `http://www.portlandonline.com/police/crimestats/`.

68\. In Salem, Oregon, violent crime, property crime, and drug offenses show
no significant jumps post -legalization. Although Salem is farther from the
border with Washington, there are no indications of major spillover effects
between 2012 and 2014. See Linda Weber, "Monthly Crime Statistics," Salem
Police Department, 2015,
`http://www.cityofsalem.net/Departments/Police/HowDoI2/Pages/CrimeStatistics.aspx`.
Alaska is not covered in this section because reliable recent crime data for
major Alaskan cities were unavailable at the time of writing.

69\. For a review of this issues, see Rune Elvik, "Risk of Road Accident
Associated with the Use of Drugs: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of
Evidence from Epidemiological Studies," Accident Analysis and Prevention 60
(2013): 254-67, doi:10.1016/j.aap.2012.06.017,
`http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22785089`.

70\. Academic studies examining this issue have suggested a possible
substitution effect. A 2015 report by the Governors Highway Safety
Organization cited one study revealing that marijuana-positive fatalities rose
by 4 percent after legalization in Colorado. However, another study from the
same report discovered no change in total traffic fatalities in California
after its decriminalization of the drug in 2011. See also Andrew Sewell et
al., "The Effect of Cannabis Compared with Alcohol on Driving," American
Journal on Addictions 18, no. 3 (2009): 185-93,
`http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2722956/`.

71\. Kevin A. Sabet, "Colorado Will Show Why Legalizing Marijuana Is a
Mistake," Washington Times, January 17, 2014,
`http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2014/jan/17/sabet-marijuana-
legalizations-worst-enemy/`.

72\. Associated Press, "Fatal Crashes Involving Marijuana Doubled in
Washington after Legalization," The Oregonian, August 20, 2015,
`http://www.oregonlive.com/marijuana/index.ssf/2015/08/fatal_crashes_involving_mariju.html`.

73\. Noelle Phillips and Elizabeth Hernandez, "Colorado Still Not Sure Whether
Legal Marijuana Made Roads Less Safe," Denver Post, December 29, 2015,
`http://www.denverpost.com/2015/12/29/colorado-still-not-sure-whether-legal-
marijuana-made-roads-less-safe/`.

74\. Radley Balko, "Since Marijuana Legalization, Highway Fatalities in
Colorado Are at Near-Historic Lows," Washington Post, August 5, 2014,
`https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-watch/wp/2014/08/05/since-marijuana-
legalization-highway-fatalities-in-colorado-are-at-near-historic-lows/`.

75\. These data include any kinds of crashes on all types of roads, as
recorded by each state's department of transportation. See Colorado Department
of Transportation's "Fatal Accident Statistics by City and County,"
`http://www.coloradodot.info/library/traffic/traffic-manuals-
guidelines/safety-crash-data/fatal-crash-data-city-county/fatal-crashes-by-
city-and-county`.

76\. Annual crash data from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
(NHTSA) confirm these findings. Our analysis uses state-level traffic accident
data from individual state transportation departments because their data are
mostly reported monthly and have a shorter reporting time lag than NHTSA data.
For NHTSA data, see "State Traffic Safety Information," NHTSA, `http://www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/departments/nrd-30/ncsa/STSI/8_CO/2014/8_CO_2014.htm`.

77\. We additionally analyzed fatality rates for accidents involving alcohol
impairment. Similarly, this time series shows no clear signs of significant
swings after marijuana policy changes, suggesting that any substitution effect
associated with marijuana has been small compared to overall drunk driving.

78\. Washington Traffic Safety Commission, 2015, `http://wtsc.wa.gov/research-
data/crash-data/`.

79\. Washington State police routinely test drivers involved in car crashes
for traces of various substances. The official legalization of marijuana use
at the end of 2012 appears to have had at most a negligible effect on crash
fatalities. The Washington Traffic Safety Commission recorded a total of 62
marijuana-related crash fatalities in 2013, compared to 61 in 2012. There does
seem to be a temporary increase in fatalities caused by marijuana-related
crashes around the same time as the establishment of Washington's first
marijuana shops. Nevertheless, any sort of spike seems to have been temporary.
In the first six months following the opening of stores, 46 crash fatalities
were tied to using marijuana while driving; over the following six months,
that number dropped to 32.

80\. Monthly data on fatal crashes themselves were not available. Monthly 2015
data were also not available at the time of writing.

81\. For instance, Meier et al. analyze a large sample of individuals tracked
from birth to age 38 and find that those who smoked marijuana most heavily
prior to age 18 lost an average of eight IQ points, a highly significant drop.
See Madeline Meier et al., "Persistent Cannabis Users Show Neuropsychological
Decline from Childhood to Midlife," Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 109, no. 40 (2012): E2657-E2664,
`http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22927402`. However, other studies have
found results that rebut Meier et al. Mokrysz et al. examine an even larger
sample of adolescents and, after controlling for many potentially confounding
variables, discover no significant correlation between teen marijuana use and
IQ change. See Claire Mokrysz et al., "Are IQ and Educational Outcomes in
Teenagers Related to Their Cannabis Use? A Prospective Cohort Study," Journal
of Psychopharmacology 30, no. 2 (2016):
159-68,`http://jop.sagepub.com/content/30/2/159`.

82\. Cobb-Clark et al. show that much of relationship between marijuana use
and educational outcomes is likely due to selection, although there is
possibly some causal effect in reducing university entrance scores. See
Deborah A. Cobb-Clark et al., "'High'-School: The Relationship between Early
Marijuana Use and Educational Outcomes," Economic Record 91, no. 293 (June
2015): 247-66. Evidence in McCaffrey et al. supports this selection
explanation of the association between marijuana use and educational outcomes.
See Daniel F. McCaffrey et al., "Marijuana Use and High School Dropout: The
Influence of Unobservables," Health Economics 19, no. 11 (November 2010):
1281-99.Roebuck et al. suggest that chronic marijuana use, not more casual
use, likely drives any relationship between marijuana use and school
attendance. See M. Christopher Roebuck et al., "Adolescent Marijuana Use and
School Attendance," Economics of Education Review 23, no. 2 (2004),
133-41.Marie and Zölitz estimate grade improvements are likely due to improved
cognitive functioning among students whose nationalities prohibited them from
consuming marijuana. See Olivier Marie and Ulf Zölitz, "'High' Achievers?
Cannabis Access and Academic Performance," CESifo Working Paper Series no.
5304, Center for Economic Studies and Ifo Institute, Munich, 2015.Van Ours and
Williams review the literature concluding that cannabis may reduce educational
outcomes, particularly with early onset of use. See Jan van Ours and Jenny
Williams, "Cannabis Use and Its Effects on Health, Education and Labor Market
Success," Journal of Economic Surveys, 29, no. 5 (December 2015): 993-1010.For
additional evidence on likely negative effects of early onset of use see also
Paolo Rungo et al., "Parental Education, child's grade repetition, and the
modifier effect of cannabis use," Applied Economics Letters 22(3)(2015):
199-203; Jan C. van Ours and Jenny Williams, "Why Parents Worry: Initiation
into Cannabis Use by Youth and Their Educational Attainment," Journal of
Health Economics 28, no. 1 (2009): 132-42; and Pinka Chatterji, "Illicit Drug
Use and Educational Attainment," Health Economics 15, no. 5 (2006): 489-511.

83\. "Suspension/Expulsion Statistics," Colorado Department of Education,
2015, `http://www.cde.state.co.us/cdereval/suspend-expelcurrent`.

84\. "Washington State Report Card, 2013-14 Results," Washington State Office
of the Superintendent of Public Instruction,
`http://reportcard.ospi.k12.wa.us/summary.aspx?groupLevel=District&schoolId=1&reportLevel=State&year=2013-14&yrs=2013-14`.

85\. Sarah Berger, "Colorado's Marijuana Industry Has a Big Impact on Denver
Real Estate: Report," International Business Times, October 20, 2015,
`http://www.ibtimes.com/colorados-marijuana-industry-has-big-impact-denver-
real-estate-report-2149623`.

86\. "S&P/Case-Schiller Denver Home Price Index," S&P Dow Jones Indices,
`http://us.spindices.com/indices/real-estate/sp-case-shiller-co-denver-home-
price-index/`.

87\. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis,
`http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?reqid=70&step=1&isuri=1&acrdn=1#reqid=70&step=30&isuri=1&7022=36&7023=0&7024=non-
industry&7033=-1&7025=0&7026=02000,08000,41000,53000&7027=-1&7001=336&7028=-1&7031=0&7040=-1&7083=levels&7029=36&7090=70`

88\. As an example, Oregon state legislator Ann Lininger wrote an op-ed
predicting a "jobs boom" in southern Oregon after marijuana legalization. See
Lininger, "Marijuana: Will Legalization Create an Economic Boom?" The
Huffington Post. October 1, 2015. `http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ann-
lininger/marijuana-will-legalizati_b_8224712.html`.

89\. "Local Area Unemployment Statistics," Bureau of Labor Statistics,
`http://www.bls.gov/lau/`.

90\. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis,
`http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?reqid=70&step=1&isuri=1&acrdn=1#reqid=70&step=10&isuri=1&7003=200&7035=-`.

91\. Colorado Department of Revenue, "Colorado Marijuana Tax Data," Colorado
Official State Web Portal, `https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/revenue/colorado-
marijuana-tax-data`.

92\. Tom Robleski, "Up in Smoke: Colorado Pot Biz Not the Tax Windfall Many
Predicted," January 2015,
`http://www.silive.com/opinion/columns/index.ssf/2015/01/up_in_smoke_colorado_pot_biz_n.html`.

93\. Washington State Department of Revenue, "Marijuana Tax Tables,"
`http://dor.wa.gov/Content/AboutUs/StatisticsAndReports/stats_MMJTaxes.aspx`
and `http://www.502data.com/`.

94\. "Washington Rakes in Revenue from Marijuana Taxes," RT (Russia Today
television channel), July 13, 2015, `https://www.rt.com/usa/273409-washington-
state-pot-taxes/`.

95\. Oregon Department of Revenue, "Marijuana Tax Program Update," Joint
Interim Committee on Marijuana Legalization, May 23, 2016,
`https://olis.leg.state.or.us/liz/2015I1/Downloads/CommitteeMeetingDocument/90434`.

  * __Tweet
  * __Like
  * __Submit
  * __Share

Angela Dills is the Gimelstob-Landry Distinguished Professor of Regional
Economic Development at Western Carolina University. Sietse Goffard is a
director 's analyst at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and a
researcher in the Department of Economics at Harvard University. Jeffrey Miron
is director of economic studies at the Cato Institute and director of
undergraduate studies in the Department of Economics at Harvard University.
The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent the views of
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau or the federal government.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

### Cato Today Newsletter

_Daily dose of liberty delivered straight to your inbox._

View full list of newsletters

### Also from Cato

  * Internships and Student Programs
  * DownsizingGovernment.org
  * Libertarianism.org
  * HumanProgress.org
  * Cato Unbound
  * Unlawful Shield
  * Freedom in the 50 States
  * Overlawyered
  * ElCato.org
  * Alt-M

### Social Media

  * __Facebook
  * __Twitter
  * __YouTube
  * __LinkedIn
  * __Instagram
  * __Tumblr
  * __RSS

![](/sites/cato.org/files/cato-logo_0.png)

Cato Institute  
1000 Massachusetts Ave, NW  
Washington, DC 20001-5403

  * Phone (202) 842 0200

Privacy Policy

Contact Us

Media Contact

![](https://www.facebook.com/tr?id= 454916984694808&ev=PageView&noscript=1)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

