

![Drugabuse.com Logo](https://drugabuse.com/wp-

content/themes/drugabuse-v2/img/da-white-logo-tagline.svg)

  * GENERAL INFORMATION 
    * Facts and Information 
    * Browse by Drug 
    * Media 
    * Infographics, Videos, and More 
    * Featured Media 
    * Expert Guides 
    * Frequently Asked Questions 
    * Substance Abuse FAQs 
    * Intervention FAQs 
    * Painkiller FAQs 
    * Detox FAQs 
    * Finding Help FAQs 
    * Why Are Drugs So Addictive? 
    * Alcohol 
    * Amphetamine 
    * Cocaine 
    * Crack 
    * Heroin 
    * Methamphetamine 
    * Opiates 
    * Painkillers 
    * Prescription Drugs 
    * Tramadol 
    * Xanax 
    * Addiction Stigma 
    * Are You an Enabler? 
    * Famous Drug Abusers 
    * Workplace Drug Abuse 
    * Teen Drug Abuse 
  * DRUG EFFECTS 
    * Effects of Drugs 
    * Drug Withdrawal 
    * Overdose 
    * Drugs and Pregnancy 
    * Cocaine and Pregnancy 
    * Drinking while Pregnant 
    * Heroin and Pregnancy 
    * Marijuana and Pregnancy 
    * MDMA and Pregnancy 
    * Meth and Pregnancy 
    * Painkillers and Pregnancy 
    * Smoking while Pregnant 
  * GET HELP 
    * Find Help Now 
    * Screening: Are You Addicted? 
    * Hotlines 
    * Treatment Types 
    * Inpatient Treatment 
    * Outpatient Treatment 
    * Aftercare 
    * Addiction Therapies 
    * 5 Signs You Need Rehab Now 
    * Help a Loved One 
  * SIGNS OF DRUG ABUSE 
    * Signs and Symptoms 
    * Mixing Drugs and Alcohol 
  * ABOUT AAC 
  *     * Sections 
  * General Information 

    * Facts and Information 
    * Browse by Drug 
    * Media 
    * Infographics, Videos, and More 
    * Featured Media 
    * Expert Guides 
    * Frequently Asked Questions 
    * Substance Abuse FAQs 
    * Intervention FAQs 
    * Painkiller FAQs 
    * Detox FAQs 
    * Finding Help FAQs 
    * Why Are Drugs So Addictive? 
    * Alcohol 
    * Amphetamine 
    * Cocaine 
    * Crack 
    * Heroin 
    * Methamphetamine 
    * Opiates 
    * Painkillers 
    * Prescription Drugs 
    * Tramadol 
    * Xanax 
    * Addiction Stigma 
    * Are You an Enabler? 
    * Famous Drug Abusers 
    * Workplace Drug Abuse 
    * Teen Drug Abuse 
  * Drug Effects 
    * Effects of Drugs 
    * Drug Withdrawal 
    * Overdose 
    * Drugs and Pregnancy 
    * Cocaine and Pregnancy 
    * Drinking while Pregnant 
    * Heroin and Pregnancy 
    * Marijuana and Pregnancy 
    * MDMA and Pregnancy 
    * Meth and Pregnancy 
    * Painkillers and Pregnancy 
    * Smoking while Pregnant 
  * Get Help 
    * Find Help Now 
    * Screening: Are You Addicted? 
    * Hotlines 
    * Treatment Types 
    * Inpatient Treatment 
    * Outpatient Treatment 
    * Aftercare 
    * Addiction Therapies 
    * 5 Signs You Need Rehab Now 
    * Help a Loved One 
  * Signs of Drug Abuse 
    * Signs and Symptoms 
    * Mixing Drugs and Alcohol 
  * About AAC 
  * Blog 
  * Forums 
  * Directory 

Overcome Your Addition Get Help Now.

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

# The Great Debate: Alcohol vs Marijuana

Authored By Lauren Villa, MPH

Leave a Comment :: Posted to: Alcoholism, Drug Abuse

![alcohol vs marijuana](https://drugabuse-

com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/Marijuana-vs-Alcohol-620x260.jpg)

What's worse for you—alcohol or marijuana?

You may have had the debate yourself—what’s worse? Alcohol or marijuana? With
new studies coming out, more laws legalizing the recreational, and medicinal
use of marijuana, the conversation seems to come up again and again.

Even though we may all have different opinions, marijuana remains a Schedule I
drug, while alcohol is legal to consume for people who are 21 years of age or
older.

In a now famous New Yorker interview, President Obama said, “I don’t think it
[marijuana] is more dangerous than alcohol.”

So, is alcohol or marijuana more dangerous? Here we present both sides of the
debate so you can decide for yourself.

## Overdose

In most cases, drinking alcohol is not life-threatening. However, **when
people consume too much alcohol, it can be fatal**. The CDC reports that
nearly 88,000 alcohol-related deaths occur each year. And binge drinking
accounted for about half of these deaths.

In comparison, **the number of deaths caused by marijuana is almost zero**. A
study found that a fatal dose of TCH, the potent chemical in marijuana, would
be between 15 and 70 grams. To give you an idea of how much marijuana that is,
consider that a typical joint contains about half a gram of marijuana. **That
means that you would have to smoke between 238 and 1,113 joints in a day to
overdose on marijuana**. That’s a lot of joints.

## Crime Rates

When it comes to what substance will put someone at risk for getting hurt or
hurting others, **alcohol is considered to cause themost harm**.

A study on marijuana use and intimate partner violence found that couples who
used marijuana had lower rates of intimate partner violence in the first 9
years of marriage. In fact, men who used marijuana were the least likely to
commit an act of intimate partner violence against a spouse.

## Driving

Driving stoned is considerably safer than driving drunk, but it is still
dangerous.

Besides alcohol, marijuana is the most commonly detected drug in drivers
involved in car accidents. One study found that **marijuana increased the odds
of being in car accident by 83%**.

You may think that 83% is high, but **when alcohol was involved, the odds of
being in a car accident increased more than 2,200%!**

When _both_ alcohol and drugs were in the system, the risk of having a fatal
car accident is especially high.

What’s the takeaway here? **It’s never a good idea to drive under the
influence of drugs _or_ alcohol, but especially both**.

## Learning and Memory

After a long night of heavy drinking, you may not remember what happened the
night before. This is often referred to as a “blackout.”

When you drink heavily it can impair your ability to create new memories. Over
50% of frequent binge drinkers reported at least one time in the past year
when they blacked out and forgot where they were or what they did when they
were drinking.

In an email survey, college students reported that after a blackout they did
things that they could not remember, like driving drunk, having unprotected
sex, or engaged in risky behavior.

Along the lines of memory, recent studies have shown that **adolescents who
smoke marijuana may be at greater risk for problems with memory and learning
later in life**. The studies remain inconclusive about how much marijuana use
causes impairments of learning and memory. But studies have demonstrated that
these types of changes in the brain may increase the risk of psychological
difficulties later in life.

Controversy remains over what percentage of psychosis risk can be linked to
marijuana use and how much depends on a person’s genetics.

## Pregnancy

**Using alcohol even during the first few weeks of pregnancy can cause long-
lasting effects on a child**. According to the CDC, 3.3 million women are at
risk of exposing their baby to alcohol.

If you drink during pregnancy, you are at risk for having a child born with
physical, behavioral, and intellectual disabilities—these are called fetal
alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs). According to the CDC **there is no known
amount of alcohol that is safe to consume during pregnancy**.

But marijuana may not be safe either. Studies show there may be a link between
marijuana use during pregnancy and low birth weight. Despite marijuana being
the most commonly used illegal drug during pregnancy, it’s hard to tell what
the effect of marijuana use is, since there are not many studies out there.

So you’re probably wondering, with all of this information the question
remains, alcohol or marijuana? What side are you on? Perhaps we can shift our
thinking and instead of taking sides, we can all agree that both alcohol and
marijuana have their risks. The overall take-home message may be if you are
about to drive a car, **if you are an adolescent, or you are pregnant you
probably should not use either one**.

### Related Posts:

  * ![Can’t Sleep? Try Putting Down the Marijuana \(Seriously\)](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock79929303-Pot-Chases-the-Zs-Away-1-150x150.jpg) Can't Sleep? Try Putting Down the Marijuana…
  * ![Voices From Both Sides of the Medical Marijuana Debate](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/iStock-image1-150x150.jpg) Voices From Both Sides of the Medical Marijuana Debate
  * ![We’re One Step Closer to a Marijuana Breathalyzer](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock455602075-Groundbreaking-THC-Breath-Test-150x150.jpg)We're One Step Closer to a Marijuana Breathalyzer
  * ![Would You Give Medical Marijuana to a Chronically Ill Pet?](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock532262202-Pets-on-Pot-150x150.jpg)Would You Give Medical Marijuana to a Chronically Ill Pet?
  * ![New Bone Loss Study Points the Finger at Marijuana](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/DrugAbuse-iStock5909599-Cannabis-Brittle-Bones-150x150.jpg)New Bone Loss Study Points the Finger at Marijuana
  * ![Let’s Clear the Air About Secondhand Marijuana Smoke](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/Copy-of-iStock_000009278592_Medium-150x150.jpg)Let's Clear the Air About Secondhand Marijuana Smoke

  *     * Addicted? Get Help Today 
  * Find Treatment Programs To Help 

  * Forums Join The Conversation 

  * Blog Recent Articles 

Categories

  * Blog Mainpage 
  * Addiction in the News
  * Addiction Research
  * Alcoholism
  * Detox and Withdrawal
  * Drug Abuse
  * Drugs and Society
  * Drugs and the Law
  * Infographics
  * Prescription Drugs
  * Quizzes
  * Strange
  * Understanding Addiction

Substance Abuse Organizations

![SAMHSA, NIDA, NIAA, WADA](/wp-content/themes/drugabuse-v2/build/img/sao-

logos-2x.png)

Substance Abuse Stats

  * 23.1 Million people need treatment for illicit substance or alcohol abuse -- 9.1% of all Americans*. 

*aged 12 or older. Data accurate as of 2010. * 9% of Americans needing treatment for substance abuse are receiving it, leaving 20.5 million people still in need. 

  * 17.9 Million people in the U.S. have alcohol dependence or abuse problems -- 7% of the population.* 

*aged 12 or older. Data accurate as of 2010. 

What's Popular

  * Before & After: Physical Effects of Drugs Leave a comment
  * Big Pharma: Are They Advertising Addiction? Leave a comment ![](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/drugabuse_shutter184172777_prescription_with_drugs-320x200.jpg)
  * What Are Bath Salts and Why Are They So Dangerous Leave a comment ![](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/drugabuse-shutter292395617-bath-salts-320x275.jpg)
  * The Five Most Famous Drug Cartels Leave a comment ![](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/drugabuse-shutter265783499-drug-cartels-320x275.jpg)
  * Chronic Disease Treatment Success Rates Leave a comment ![](https://drugabuse-com.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/drugabuse-shutter128569904-illustration-of-HIV-in-bloodstream-320x275.jpg)

Use Our New Directory To Find Treatment Today

Search

Need Help Overcoming Addiction?

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

Search By State

Select a State

  * Alabama 
  * Alaska 
  * Arizona 
  * Arkansas 
  * California 
  * Colorado 
  * Connecticut 
  * Delaware 
  * District Of Columbia 
  * Florida 
  * Georgia 
  * Hawaii 
  * Idaho 
  * Illinois 
  * Indiana 
  * Iowa 
  * Kansas 
  * Kentucky 
  * Louisiana 
  * Maine 
  * Maryland 
  * Massachusetts 
  * Michigan 
  * Minnesota 
  * Mississippi 
  * Missouri 
  * Montana 
  * Nebraska 
  * Nevada 
  * New Hampshire 
  * New Jersey 
  * New Mexico 
  * New York 
  * North Carolina 
  * North Dakota 
  * Ohio 
  * Oklahoma 
  * Oregon 
  * Pennsylvania 
  * Rhode Island 
  * South Carolina 
  * South Dakota 
  * Tennessee 
  * Texas 
  * Utah 
  * Vermont 
  * Virginia 
  * Washington 
  * West Virginia 
  * Wisconsin 
  * Wyoming 

(C) DrugAbuse.com 2019. All Rights Reserved

Privacy Policy Terms of Use

Drugabuse.com is operated by Recovery Brands LLC, a subsidiary of American
Addiction Centers, Inc.

You're Ready to Escape Addiction

1-888-744-0069 Who Answers?

GENERAL DISCLAIMER: Drugabuse.com is designed for educational purposes only
and is not engaged in rendering medical advice. The information provided
through Drugabuse.com should not be used for diagnosing or treating a health
problem or disease. It is not a substitute for professional care. If you have
or suspect you may have a health problem, you should consult your health care
provider. The authors, editors, producers, and contributors shall have no
liability, obligation, or responsibility to any person or entity for any loss,
damage, or adverse consequences alleged to have happened directly or
indirectly as a consequence of material on this website. If you believe you
have a medical emergency, you should immediately call 911.

Drugabuse.com is operated by Recovery Brands LLC, a subsidiary of American
Addiction Centers, Inc. Learn more about what this means here.

Ready for Drug or Alcohol Rehab?

Discuss Treatment Options Call Toll Free 24 Hours A Day

Call Us Today! 1-888-744-0069

Who Answers?

Name:

Email:

Phone Number:

I Am:

\--- The Addicted Person A Family Member A Friend A Co-Worker A
Doctor/Therapist Other

Ability to Finance:

\--- There is Ample Money or Private Insurance There is Some Money or Private
Insurance There is No Money or Private Insurance I Am Interested in Financing
I Am Not Sure

Addiction(s):

\--- Alcohol Illicit (Street) Drugs Prescription Drugs A Combination of
Substances Other Addiction

Any Other Important Details:

I have read and agree to the conditions outlined in the Terms of Use and
Privacy Policy.

SEND

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit. Ratione ipsa
excepturi quae cum magnam quibusdam quos quam pariatur, libero veritatis aut
harum, laborum similique optio natus, nulla possimus necessitatibus soluta!

## How Our Helpline Works

For those seeking addiction treatment for themselves or a loved one, the
DrugAbuse.com helpline is a private and convenient solution.

**Calls to any general helpline (non-facility specific 1-8XX numbers) for your
visit will be answered by American Addiction Centers (AAC).**

We are standing by 24/7 to discuss your treatment options. Our representatives
work solely for AAC and will discuss whether an AAC facility may be an option
for you.

Our helpline is offered at no cost to you and with no obligation to enter into
treatment. Neither DrugAbuse.com nor AAC receives any commission or other fee
that is dependent upon which treatment provider a visitor may ultimately
choose.

For more information on AAC’s commitment to ethical marketing and treatment
practices, or to learn more about how to select a treatment provider, visit
our About AAC page.

If you wish to explore additional treatment options or connect with a specific
rehab center, you can visit our directory or SAMHSA’s treatment services
locator.

Ready for Drug or Alcohol Rehab?

Discuss Treatment Options Call Toll Free 24 Hours A Day

Call Us Today! 1-888-744-0069

Who Answers?

Select your state and then choose Alcohol Treatment or Drug Treatment

Please choose a state Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado
Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas
Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi
Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York
North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island
South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington
West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming

Drug Treatment Alcohol Treatment

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

