

Skip to main content

# GET THE FACTS: Drug Abuse Puts Your Whole Body at Risk

  * Print

    * Help with printing?

#### PRINT THIS PAGE

**Printer-friendly format, no images**

Removes all graphics, other content, and advertising. Use this if you just
want the body text!

**Printer-friendly format, with images**

Removes other content, and advertising, but images remain. Use this if you
want to print out pictures alongside the body text!

Close

First published 2007

**![morefacts.JPG](../sites/default/files/morefacts.jpg)Research shows . . .**

"Drug abuse and addiction can affect almost every system in your body. You
probably know that drugs affect feelings and moods, judgment, decision making,
learning, and memory. But they can also cause or worsen other health
problems—cancer; heart disease; lung disease; liver function; mental
disorders; and infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS, hepatitis, and
tuberculosis. Some of these effects occur when drugs are used at high doses or
after prolonged use, and some may occur after just one use."

—Nora Volkow, M.D., Director of NIDA

  * **Tobacco addiction** increases risk of **lung and heart disease** , as well as **premature aging of the skin**.
  * **Inhalants** spread toxic chemicals throughout the body, and can cause **blackouts** and **hearing loss** as well as **liver** , **kidney** , and **bone-marrow damage**.
  * **Methamphetamine** can cause **cardiac damage** , **elevated heart rate** , and **convulsions** , and can also lead to diseased gums and teeth, known as "meth mouth."
  * **Cocaine** has been linked to **stroke** and **heart attack** , as well as increased **vulnerability to infection**.
  * **Drug abuse** is linked to the top U.S. medical problems, including **heart disease, cancer, HIV/AIDS** , and **mental illness**.

**HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis, and Other Infectious Diseases**  
Nearly one-third of reported AIDS cases have been linked to **injection drug**
use—heroin, cocaine, or any drug that abusers inject. One way that HIV/AIDS,
hepatitis, and other infectious diseases are spread is through the sharing of
needles or other injection equipment. But it is not only injection drug users
who risk contracting or spreading infections. The intoxicating effects of
**all drugs of abuse affect judgment and decision making** —leading users to
engage in behaviors that could have dire health consequences, including the
spread of HIV.

**Mental Health Effects**  
Drug abuse might affect an existing mental disorder or result in one. More
than half of those who are addicted to drugs have also had some form of mental
illness—either at the same time as their addiction or at some other point in
their lives. This is probably not due to chance: drugs affect many of the same
brain systems that are responsible for mental disorders. There may also be
common genetic and environmental causes of both. What we know from research is
that long-lasting changes in the brain caused by chronic drug abuse may lead
to **depression, aggression, paranoia** , and **hallucinations.**

**Smoking**  
Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of death in the United
States, causing about 440,000 deaths per year in the U.S. alone. Smoking leads
to **heart disease, lung cancer** , and other lung problems, such as
**emphysema** and **chronic bronchitis**. Tobacco addiction is a direct result
of **nicotine** —one of the many chemicals found in tobacco products—which
acts on receptors in the brain and the body. Tobacco smoke also affects other
body systems, changing their functions and ultimately leading to disease.
Prenatal exposure to tobacco can have long-lasting effects on the next
generation; and even **secondhand smoke** is linked to diseases in those
exposed.

**_![bottle.JPG](../sites/default/files/bottle.jpg)_**

**_Read the Label_**

**Prescription medications** may be mistakenly thought of as safe because they
are prescribed by a doctor for an illness—but if they are not prescribed for
you, then they are not safe for you.

Abuse of **prescription opioids** , such as Vicodin® and OxyContin®, can lead
to addiction. Taking a single large dose could cause **severe respiratory
depression** (includes difficulty in breathing or stopped breathing) that can
lead to death. The same holds true for abuse of **prescription central nervous
system depressants** , such as Xanax® and Valium®.

Abuse of **prescription stimulants** , such as Ritalin® or Adderall®, can lead
to **feelings of hostility** or **paranoia**. Further, taking high doses of a
stimulant may result in **dangerously high body temperature** and an
**irregular heartbeat**. There is also the potential for **heart system
failure** or **fatal seizures**.

**_FACTivate—for Your Life_**

**Get More Facts!** Find out more about the medical consequences of drug abuse
and addiction at:  
**www.scholastic.com/headsup**  
**www.teens.drugabuse.gov**  
**www.drugabuse.gov**

**Check Up!** See a doctor for regular checkups. Be sure to mention if you
abuse drugs—this is confidential information your doctor needs to know. A
prescribed medication might interact badly with a drug of abuse.

**Get Up!** Do some type of physical activity every day for overall good
health.

**Eat Healthy!** Eat balanced meals, limiting your intake of fats and sweets,
to give your body the energy it needs.

**Hydrate!** Drink liquids throughout the day, especially while exercising. To
nourish your body, reach for water instead of sugared drinks.

**Cover Up!** Wear protective gear and sunblock when outside to block damaging
rays.

**Speak Up!** Talk to your parents or to another trusted adult about your
health-related questions. Ask questions and insist on answers.

Learn additional facts about how drug abuse puts your whole body at risk.

Learn more about how to find reliable sources for health information on the
Web.

Printables

Download a print copy of:

## drugabuse.pdf

![](../modules/file/icons/application-pdf.png) drugabuse.pdf

Header image credit:

(Image Credit: © 3D4Medical.com/Getty Images.)

![](/sites/default/files/block/images/NIDA_Student_Subpage_SideHdrs_1.jpg)

SEARCH

## Science & Facts from

the National Institute  
on Drug Abuse (NIDA)

  * Marijuana
  * Tobacco & Alcohol
  * Prescription Drugs
  * Drug Health Effects
  * Brain Science
  * Drug Facts
  * Videos
  * Science of Addiction
  * National Drug Facts Week

![](/sites/default/files/drug_facts_chat_button.png)
![](/sites/default/files/drug_facts_chat_bg_2.png)

  * About Heads Up
  * About NIDA
  * NIDA for Teens
  * NIDA in the News

From Scholastic and the Scientists of the National Institute on Drug Abuse,
National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Heads Up teacher site
![](/profiles/headsup_profile/themes/custom/headsup_theme/images/teacher-link-

arrow.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

