

![attn](https://s3.amazonaws.com/attn-assets/logos/logo-white.svg)Menu

AboutCareers![attn](https://s3.amazonaws.com/attn-assets/logos/logo-

white.svg)ContactBlog

* * *

TermsPrivacy

# Come experience the new attn.com

entertainment that informs

Visit attn.com

Justice

# The History of Opium in the United States

June 14th 2015

![](https://static.attn.com/sites/default/files/12967322_10206220952022347_6152873345698143463_o.jpg?auto=format&crop=faces&fit=crop&q=60&w=136&h=136&ixlib=js-1.1.0)

## By:

Thor Benson

"It has been estimated that in San Francisco thirty per cent of the Chinese
are addicted to smoking [opium] and that ten per cent of the entire population
of Chinatown are habitual 'opium drunkards,'" reads a Scientific American
article from 1898. "The drug is smoked as freely as tobacco. First, there are
the opium dens. There are scores of these dens in the Chinese quarter of every
large city. There the Chinaman can buy his pipe and smoke in peace. In San
Francisco white people are forbidden to visit these dens, but they have such
places of their own, which are well known to the police, and the vice is ever
spreading and increasing."

First of all, "Chinaman" is not the preferred nomenclature these days, but
that was the scene when opium was starting to become a concern to the American
government. The Scientific American article goes on to describe how the laws
were changing regarding opium, including referencing San Francisco's place as
the first city in the U.S. to effectively ban smoking the drug toward the end
of the 1800s, which we've illustrated before. White men were becoming
concerned with Chinese men luring their women into opium dens, so they
outlawed smoking it, which made it possible to throw Chinese men in jail if
they were seen as threats. Drinking and injecting opium was popular among
white men and women at the time, so that was not outlawed in the city. During
the 1890s, tabloids owned by William Randolph Hearst led a fear campaign,
claiming white women were being seduced by Chinese men in the opium dens, and
they referred to it as the "Yellow Peril."

**The Chinese immigration experience**

Some Chinese men started coming to the U.S. around 1820, and some larger
groups appeared in the 1830s and 40s. These men were coming to America to work
as merchants, to mine gold and for other work opportunities. The first Chinese
woman to come to America, Afong Moy, arrived in 1834. By the 1860s, Chinese
immigration became more common, and Chinese men helped build the First
Transcontinental Railroad. The Chinese population on the West Coast grew
quickly by the time the railroad began construction. It is estimated that
between 1850 and 1889, 300,000 Chinese people immigrated to America, though
many of them ended up going back to China.

Chinese workers first became a perceived threat to white male workers in the
1870s when there was a work shortage. White Americans viewed these Chinese men
as racially inferior and felt they were taking work away from them. The
Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 banned Chinese immigration for 10 years, and it
was extended another 10 years by the Geary Act of 1892. Prejudice against the
Chinese in America remained for decades. When Congress passed the Harrison Tax
Act of 1914, which effectively outlawed opium nationwide, it was became
another measure to gain power over the Chinese population.

**Other drugs derived from opium**

Opium, and the heroin that can be created from the opium poppy, have a long
medical history in the country as well. Opium was used to calm cranky babies
in the 1830s and as a treatment for asthma. Morphine, also created from opium,
was used as a pain reliever during the Civil War. In 1895, the pharmaceutical
company Bayer synthesized heroin for the first time, and Bayer Heroin was
released in 1898. Heroin was actually a brand name Bayer created, not just
some street name for the drug. Since many people became addicted to morphine
during and after the Civil War, Bayer Heroin was used as a pain reliever that
could help people get rid of their morphine addiction. This backfired. Using
heroin for recreational or medicinal uses became illegal in the U.S. under the
Heroin Act of 1924.

"Hipster" is not a new term. It originally referred to the jazz players and
enthusiasts of the 1930s and beyond. From the hipsters to the beatniks of the
1950s, heroin was often the drug of choice for its euphoric effect. It may no
longer be legal, but opium and opium-based drugs are still widespread in
certain places across the U.S. to this day. In fact, Heroin is currently a
Schedule I narcotic, along with marijuana, LSD, MDMA and others, which means
that is both illegal and classified as having no accepted medicinal use. Opium
may have originally become illegal because of Chinese men, but now we can all
go to prison for having it.

Share your opinion

## Would you be in favor of decriminalizing all drugs?

No 16%Yes 84%

![attn](https://s3.amazonaws.com/attn-assets/logos/logo-white.svg)

entertainment that informs

* * *

ContactTermsPrivacy

© 2018 ATTN:, Inc.

![Quantcast](//pixel.quantserve.com/pixel/p-JPcKvqWu7UX4A.gif)

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

