

Skip to main content

National Institutes of Health DrugAbuse.gov Get Email Updates Contact Us

![NIDA for Teens: The Science Behind Drug

Abuse](/sites/all/themes/teens/logo.png)

Have a drug problem—need help?

__ Search

__ Search

## close

  * Teens
  * Teachers
  * Parents
  * Drugs & Health Blog
  * National Drug & Alcohol Facts Week®

Enter Search Term(s):

__

Teens / Drugs & Health Blog / Word of the Day: Euphoria

Drugs & Health Blog

# Word of the Day: Euphoria

Print __

Drug Facts

![image of

Euphoria](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/medium/public/euphoria_forweb.jpg?itok=pRT46IyI)

Image Courtesy of Nicholas Noyes

Sara Bellum

March 24, 2010

**Euphoria:** A feeling of well-being or elation.

**Euphoria** is that excitement you get from getting a perfect score on a
test, or attention from someone you have a crush on. It can come from a roller
coaster ride or as the rush from a physical activity like downhill skiing,
especially the first time. These feelings of euphoria are all healthy and
natural.

What's not healthy or natural is taking drugs to feel "euphoric." Drugs of
abuse artificially produce euphoria by manipulating your brain chemistry to
make it seem that something exciting is happening. To get this feeling again,
you may choose to use the drugs again-and again. And that can lead to craving
and addiction.

Over time, the brain needs more of the drug to get the same feelings of
pleasure. Why? The drug causes surges, like waves, of the brain chemical
dopamine, which initially produce the euphoria. After repeated hits, though,
the brain adjusts to this higher level of dopamine by making less of it and by
reducing the number of receptors that can receive and transmit the signals it
sends. Pretty soon, the drug abuser is taking the drug just to bring the
dopamine functions back up to normal and to avoid the horrible craving that
compels them to seek and use drugs even when their lives and health are
falling apart. That is really the essence of addiction.

![People jumping in the

air.](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/images/people_jumping.jpg)

But the good news is that natural, healthy experiences of euphoria don't wreck
the brain's chemistry. So think about what you do in life that makes you feel
good. Spending time with friends, playing with your dog, doing sports, seeing
a good movie? Any of these activities can create a natural euphoria by
triggering the brain's reward system the way it was meant to work.

So don't let drugs fool your brain, and then wreck it.

* * *

Follow Us on Twitter

Follow Us on Facebook

Subscribe to RSS Feed

## Find Help Near You

Use the SAMHSA Treatment Locator to find substance use or other mental health
services in your area. If you are in an emergency situation, this toll-free,
24-hour hotline can help you get through this difficult time: call
1-800-273-TALK, or visit the Suicide Prevention Lifeline. We also have step by
step guides on what to do to help yourself, a friend or a family member.

_**Teachers:** For ideas on how to use this blog in the classroom, visit the
Drugs  & Health Blog Teacher's Guide._

**_What would you like us to write about on the Drugs & Health Blog?_** _Tell
us in a comment below._

Categories:

Brain ScienceWord of the Day

Tags:

AddictionAddiction ScienceBrain Reward SystemDopamine

Comments posted to the Drugs & Health Blog are from the general public and may
contain inaccurate information. They do not represent the views of NIDA or any
other federal government entity.

## Comments

Submitted by god of c.o.d on March 24, 2010

so it is just a adrenalin rush???

  * reply

Submitted by the birdman on January 28, 2014

i guess so

  * reply

Submitted by Phil on March 28, 2010

Good News....looking for more update

  * reply

Submitted by malena on September 10, 2010

it is like rush of adrenalin... and you cant stop moving... you are dancing
and dancing... and when you feel good it is really good but when your scaerd
od upset its horrible... you are felling like police are hunting you becouse
you did something really wrong... but the feeling is amazing... i dont usuali
take anything like that and it was my first time... and i really enyoed...
feeling goes away after 4-5 hours... and your like new then =)))

  * reply

Submitted by NIDAMinds on September 23, 2010

@malena @Malena—that is a good description, except you’re not really “like
new,” because your brain has been affected by the drug. For some people, this
feeling is irresistible, and they will want to do it again….and again. You get
to the point where the drug takes up too much of your life and wastes a lot of
your time. And possibly—causes addiction, which brings with it lots of things
that nobody wants.

  * reply

Submitted by acne overnight on September 26, 2010

I always amazed what is this called? I never knew it was termed as 'Euphoria'.
I had once felt like i am the god and am immense power surge ran in me when i
first time talked to a girl whom i had an humongous crush on. Thanks for this
article post.

  * reply

Submitted by Swim on January 13, 2014

The euphoria is a feeling in which you have a crazy amount of self confidence
it makes you feel good about what you are doing because you believe in
yourself and when you believe in yourself you are more likely to do better.
Drugs that cause this are addictive because they let you crave the euphoria
usually someone who takes a drug to get a euphoria high doesn't have self
confidence and doesn't have a lot of euphoria in there normal everyday lives

  * reply

Submitted by goob on March 07, 2014

One time i had euphoria and i had to lay down cuz i del so bad and my dad cam
in a sayid well saon u r bad and im agona call the cop amd so he did and then
we went tk the cop and he said u r arrest ed but then i took ore with him and
we have ok

  * reply

Submitted by LOLOLOOL on April 15, 2014

i thinks its when u accomplish something rlly hard. like a jump on a snowboard
or winning a swim race (ive done all of those)

  * reply

Submitted by maria on December 02, 2014

well am doing it in my 9th grade class as a project with my group and we
picked club drugs this gives us some facts but not all you need to have more
details thanks and plz

  * reply

Submitted by NIDAMinds on December 02, 2014

Hi Maria. Club drugs include GHB, Rohypnol, ketamine, MDMA (Molly), Meth, and
LSD. You can find information about club drugs on the main National Institute
on Drug Abuse website.

You should also check our Drug Facts pages on MDMA, and Meth.

Good luck and let us know if you need information on specific drugs.

  * reply

Submitted by Miss Information on January 18, 2017

"Comments posted to the Drugs & Health Blog are from the general public and
may contain inaccurate information." Apparently the blog itself may contain
inaccurate information too: "The drug causes surges, like waves, of the brain
chemical dopamine, which initially produce the euphoria." Rather than dopamine
causing pleasure, it is pleasure that causes dopamine surges, which in turn
cause the compulsive behavior called addiction. The idea that dopamine causes
pleasure has generally been abandoned for some time now. If it was just a
matter of levels of dopamine, abstinence would cure addiction, and relapse
wouldn't occur. Cravings can be triggered long after dopamine levels are
restored. That's what makes addiction such a serious problem—not an easy fix.
Once that happens, all the sources of normal euphoria lose value next to the
drug. So get a healthy diet of normal euphoria. Music and comedy are great
options too. Anyway, perhaps an NIDA scientist should review blog posts for
technical accuracy.

  * reply

Submitted by NIDAMinds on March 27, 2017

You are probably right that “surges in dopamine” relate to reinforcement of
reward and generation of incentive salience and not the reward (euphoria)
itself. Recent research has attempted to better distinguish these processes,
and is finding that some of the same brain areas such as the nucleus accumbens
are involved in both; but while motivation to obtain a drug and the learning
processes that govern incentive salience involve dopamine surges in these
mesolimbic circuits, recent research (for instance by NIDA-funded researcher
Kent Berridge) is suggesting that activation of mu opioid receptors in the
nucleus accumbens shell (and possibly other brain areas) are responsible for
the actual pleasure animals feel in enjoying goals, such as the enjoyment of
sweet food in rats. More research needs to be conducted to verify that drug
euphoria in humans is also mediated by opioids in the same small brain
targets.

  * reply

Submitted by Definition Joe on March 06, 2017

Humans tend to focus on the reward. But in nature it is more about the work
that you put in. And in reality dopamine is more a reflection of a sensed
opportunity than some reward for a job well done. Two sides of the same coin,
but while the reward perspective makes sense to people, the opportunity
perspective is what matters for future behavior, growth, survival and
procreation. It is perhaps also what makes you happy: Sensing great
opportunity to fulfill your destiny, fill your stomach, mate with someone
healthy and have lots of offspring. Dopamine euphoria drives you towards all
of that. The "reward" is incidental really.

  * reply

## Add new comment

Comment *

Your name

Current state: Approved

CAPTCHA

This question is for testing whether or not you are a human visitor and to
prevent automated spam submissions.

Leave this field blank

##### Cite this article

APA StyleMLA StyleAMA Style

The National Institute on Drug Abuse Blog Team. (2010, March 24). Word of the
Day: Euphoria. Retrieved from https://teens.drugabuse.gov/blog/post/word-day-
euphoria on

The National Institute on Drug Abuse Blog Team. "Word of the Day: Euphoria."
_Drugs & Health Blog_, 24 Mar. 2010, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
https://teens.drugabuse.gov/blog/post/word-day-euphoria.

The National Institute on Drug Abuse Blog Team. Word of the Day: Euphoria.
National Institute on Drug Abuse for Teens website.
https://teens.drugabuse.gov/blog/post/word-day-euphoria. March 24, 2010.
Accessed

press ctrl+c to copy

![Drugs and Health Blog Logo](/sites/all/themes/teens/images/new-blog-

logo.png)

Receive Blog Posts in your Inbox!

**What are you interested in?**

  * Articles for Parents
  * Articles for Educators
  * Drug Information
  * Prescription Drug Abuse
  * Interactive Materials and Videos
  * Stats and Infographics
  * **_National Drug & Alcohol Facts Week_®**
  * Common Drug Questions

## Categories

  * About Drugs and Health Blog (5)
  * Brain Science (81)
  * Celebrities and Drug Use (46)
  * Drug Facts for Teens (109)
  * Guest Blogger (60)
  * Healthy Minds and Bodies (125)
  * Marijuana (51)
  * National Drug and Alcohol Facts Week (47)
  * NIDA News & Events for Teens (121)
  * Prescription Drug Use (47)
  * Real Teens Ask About Drugs (37)
  * Real-Life Drug Use Stories (14)
  * Tell Us What You Think (35)
  * Word of the Day (27)

  * Privacy Policy

  * Comment Policy

## Our Blog Teaching Guide

![Teaching Guide](/sites/default/files/images/blog_icon.png)

Supplement your drug abuse prevention curriculum with blog posts and
discussion questions.

## Current Posts

  * ![Illustration of NDAFW CSI activity: CSI: The Experience Web Adventures Case One: Case Two: Case Three: ](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/blog/CSIWebAdventures_Crop%26Outline.jpg?itok=iBvAPkh-)

Plan Your Activity for National Drug and Alcohol Facts Week®: Become a CSI
Agent!

06.10.2019

  * ![A patient lies on a stretcher with emergency medical professionals surrounding her to help. ](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/blog/image_patient_on_stretcher_med_professionals%20optimized.jpg?itok=Y9tinwl8)

Treating Opioid Use Disorder in the Emergency Room

06.03.2019

  * ![Tobacco wrinkles, bad breath, yellow teeth, wheezing, stinky clothes. Addiction skin damage cataracts wrinkles mouth cancer throat cancer heart disease lung disease image of young man](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/blog/Graphic%20You%20Said%20It%20Quit%20Smoking%20Screengrab%20optimized.jpg?itok=okMJgqTV)

You Said It: “I Know Someone Who Started Smoking and Wishes They Could Quit”

05.20.2019

## Related Posts

  * ![image of a stressed brain](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/blog/nn_stressbrain_image.jpg?itok=U-iIEV8o)

Comorbidity, a Word for Thought...

  * ![boy and girl hugging](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/kts_friend-in-need_image.jpg?itok=CkHo9ngJ)

How To Help a Friend in Need

  * ![Prescription drug abuse among teen girls](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/kts_rx-drug-abuse-252x300.jpg?itok=KU2DKU97)

Rx Drug Abuse

  * ![Quote from Harry Potter about our choices and our abilities; Image Courtesy of Garland Cannon](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/real-life_choices-197x300.jpg?itok=BFWtU-ts)

Real Life: The Choices We Make

  * ![Meth-a-morphosis](https://teens.drugabuse.gov/sites/default/files/styles/square_sidebar_thumbnail/public/meth.jpg?itok=UqvlQ_1W)

Meth Mouth and Crank Bugs: Meth-a-morphosis

  * About Us
  * Accessibility
  * FOIA
  * NIH Home
  * Privacy Policy
  * Site Map
  * Contact Us

![NIH Logo](/sites/all/themes/teens/nih-logo-footer.png)

Find NIDA for Teens on:

* * *

Site last updated June 11, 2019

NOTE: PDF documents require the free Adobe Reader. Flash content requires the
free Adobe Flash Player.

**_National Drug and Alcohol Facts Week_** ® and the **_National Drug and
Alcohol Facts Week_** ® logo design are registered marks of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. **_SHATTER THE MYTHS_** ® is a
trademark and service mark of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. **_SHATTER THE MYTHS_** ® is a registered trademark of the U.S.
Department of Health  & Human Services (HHS).

NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®

![NIH logo](/sites/all/themes/teens/images/footer-logo-nih.png) ![HHS

logo](/sites/all/themes/teens/images/footer-logo-hhs.png) ![USA.gov

logo](/sites/all/themes/teens/images/footer-logo-usa.png)

__ close

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

