

UNCLASSIFIED

ARCHIVED ![Skip navigation.](images/10h.gif) To Contents To Previous Page To
Next Page To Publications Page To Home Page ![To Home

Page.](images/ndicseal.gif) ![DOJ Seal.](images/dojseal.gif)

U.S. Department of Justice  
National Drug Intelligence Center  
_National Drug Threat Assessment 2010_  
February 2010

* * *

## Impact of Drugs on Society

The trafficking and abuse of drugs in the United States affect nearly all
aspects of our lives. The economic cost alone is immense, estimated at nearly
$215 billion. The damage caused by drug abuse and addiction is reflected in an
overburdened justice system, a strained healthcare system, lost productivity,
and environmental destruction.

### The Demand for Illicit Drugs

NSDUH data show that in 2008, 14.2 percent of individuals 12 years of age and
older had used illicit drugs during the past year. Marijuana is the most
commonly used illicit drug, with 25.8 million individuals 12 years of age and
older (10.3%) reporting past year use. That rate remains stable from the
previous year (10.1%) (see Table B1 in Appendix B). Psychotherapeutics4 ranked
second, with 15.2 million individuals reporting past year "nonmedical use" in
2008, a decrease from 16.3 million in 2007. In 2008, approximately 5.3 million
individuals aged 12 and older reported past year cocaine use, 850,000 reported
past year methamphetamine use, and 453,000 reported past year heroin use.

Rates of drug use vary by age. Rates are highest for young adults aged 18 to
25, with 33.5 percent reporting illicit drug use in the past year. Nineteen
percent of youth aged 12 to 17 report past year illicit drug use. Finally,
10.3 percent of adults aged 26 and older report past year illicit drug use.
These rates are relatively stable when compared with 2007 rates.

In 2008, approximately 2.9 million individuals tried an illicit drug or used a
prescription drug nonmedically for the first time, representing nearly 8,000
initiates per day. More than half of these new users (56.6%) report that
marijuana was the first illicit substance that they had tried. Other past year
illicit drug initiates report that their first drug was a psychotherapeutic
drug used nonmedically (29.6%), an inhalant (9.7%), or a hallucinogen (3.2%).
By drug category, marijuana and pain relievers used nonmedically each had an
estimated 2.2 million past year first-time users. Also identified frequently
as the first drug used by initiates were tranquilizers (nonmedical use--1.1
million), ecstasy/MDMA (0.9 million), inhalants (0.7 million), cocaine (0.7
million), and stimulants (0.6 million). Methamphetamine appears to be fading
in popularity among initiates. In 2008, an estimated 95,000 individuals tried
methamphetamine for the first time--a 39 percent decrease from the 2007
estimate (157,000) and a 70 percent decrease from the 2004 estimate (318,000).

To Top To Contents

### The Consequences of Illicit Drug Use

The consequences of illicit drug use are widespread, causing permanent
physical and emotional damage to users and negatively impacting their
families, coworkers, and many others with whom they have contact. Drug use
negatively impacts a user's health, often leading to sickness and disease. In
many cases, users die prematurely from drug overdoses or other drug-associated
illnesses (see text box). Some users are parents, whose deaths leave their
children in the care of relatives or in foster care. Drug law violations
constitute a substantial proportion of incarcerations in local, state, and
federal facilities and represent the most common arrest category.

Colombian Cocaine Producers Increase Use of a Harmful Cutting Agent

Since late 2007, cocaine has increasingly contained levamisole, a
pharmaceutical agent that typically is used for livestock deworming. According
to Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) Cocaine Signature Program data,
before 2008, less than 10 percent of the tested wholesale-level cocaine
samples contained levamisole. By 2009, approximately 71 percent of the tested
cocaine samples contained levamisole. Because levamisole is being found in
kilogram quantities of cocaine, investigators are confident that Colombian
traffickers are adding it as part of the production process, possibly to
enhance the effects of the cocaine. However, levamisole can be hazardous to
humans, especially those with weakened immune systems. Ingesting levamisole
can cause a person to develop agranulocytosis, a serious, sometimes fatal,
blood disorder. At least 20 confirmed and probable cases of agranulocytosis,
including two deaths, have been associated with cocaine adulterated with
levamisole. The consequences of abusing levamisole are serious enough that in
September 2009, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA) issued a nationwide public alert on its effects.

* * *

To Top To Contents

### Impact on Health and Health Care Systems

Drug use and abuse may lead to specialized treatment, ED visits (sometimes
involving death), contraction of illnesses, and prolonged hospital stays.

In 2008, NSDUH estimated that 7 million individuals aged 12 and older were
dependent on or had abused illicit drugs in the past year, compared with 6.9
million in 2007. The drugs with the highest dependence or abuse levels were
marijuana, prescription pain relievers, and cocaine. The number of individuals
reporting past year marijuana abuse or dependence was 4.2 million in 2008,
compared with 3.9 million in 2007; the number of individuals reporting past
year prescription pain reliever abuse or dependence was 1.7 million in both
2007 and 2008; and the number of individuals reporting past year cocaine abuse
or dependence was 1.4 million in 2008, compared with 1.6 million in 2007.

Many individuals who become dependent on illicit drugs eventually seek
treatment. The Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS) provides information
regarding the demographics and substance abuse patterns of treatment
admissions to state-licensed treatment facilities for drug dependence. In
2007, there were approximately 1.8 million admissions to state-licensed
treatment facilities for illicit drug dependence or abuse. The highest
percentage of admissions reported opiates as the primary drug of choice (31%,
primarily heroin) followed by marijuana/hashish (27%), cocaine (22%), and
stimulants (13%). Although approaches to treatment vary by drug, more than
half of the admissions were to ambulatory (outpatient, intensive outpatient,
and detox) facilities rather than residential facilities. (See Table B2 in
Appendix B for data on admissions for specific drugs.)

Individuals often experience adverse reactions to drugs--including nonfatal
overdoses--that require them to go to the hospital. In 2006, the Drug Abuse
Warning Network (DAWN) reported that of 113 million hospital ED visits--
1,742,887 (1.5%)--were related to drug misuse or drug abuse. An estimated 31
percent of these visits involved illicit drugs only, 28 percent involved CPDs,
and 13 percent involved illicit drugs in combination with alcohol. When drug
misuse or abuse plays a role in these ED visits, the most commonly reported
substances are cocaine, marijuana, heroin, and stimulants (typically
amphetamines or methamphetamine).

A 2007 DAWN survey of 63 metropolitan areas found an average of 12.1 deaths
per 100,000 persons related to drug use.5 Rates of drug-related deaths range
from 1.1 per 100,000 in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, to 26.1 per 100,000 in the
New Orleans area. DAWN also records the number of drug-related suicide deaths.
In 2007, the number of drug-related suicides per 100,000 persons ranged from
less than one in several jurisdictions (including Chicago, Dallas-Fort Worth,
and Minneapolis) to 6.2 per 100,000 in Fargo, North Dakota. To put these
statistics in perspective, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) reports other nonnatural death rates as follows: Motor vehicle
accidents, 15.1 per 100,000; nontransport accidents (e.g., falls, accidental
drownings), 24.4 per 100,000; suicide, 11.1 per 100,000; and homicides, 6.2
per 100,000.

The consequences of drug use usually are not limited to the user and often
extend to the user's family and the greater community. According to SAMHSA,
combined data from 2002 to 2007 indicate that during the prior year, an
estimated 2.1 million American children (3%) lived with at least one parent
who was dependent on or abused illicit drugs, and 1 in 10 children under 18
lived with a substance-addicted or substance-abusing parent.6 Moreover, the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services estimated in 1999 that substance
abuse was a factor in two-thirds of all foster care placements.

Many states have enacted drug-endangered children laws to protect children
from the consequences of drug production, trafficking, and abuse. Typically
associated with methamphetamine production, drug-endangered children are
exposed not only to abuse and neglect but also to fires, explosions, and
physical health hazards such as toxic chemicals. In 2009, 980 children were
reported to the El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC) as present at or affected
by methamphetamine laboratories, including 8 who were injured and 2 who were
killed at the laboratories. These statistics do not include children killed by
random gunfire associated with drug activity or who were physically or
sexually abused by a "caretaker" involved in drug trafficking or under the
influence of drugs.

To Top To Contents

### Impact on Crime and Criminal Justice Systems

The consequences of illicit drug use impact the entire criminal justice
system, taxing resources at each stage of the arrest, adjudication,
incarceration, and post-release supervision process. Although drug courts and
diversion programs in many jurisdictions have helped to alleviate this burden
(see text box), substance abuse within the criminal justice population remains
widespread.

Drug Courts

To alleviate the burden that drug use and abuse have caused to the nation's
criminal justice system, most jurisdictions have developed drug courts or
other diversion programs aimed at breaking the drug addiction and crime cycle.
In these nonadversarial, coordinated approaches to processing drug cases,
participants receive a full continuum of treatment services, are subject to
frequent urinalyses, and experience strict judicial monitoring in lieu of
traditional incarceration. Once the offender successfully completes treatment,
charges may be dropped.

Since the first drug court became operational in Miami in 1989, the number of
drug courts has grown each year, and such courts now exist in all 50 states as
well as the District of Columbia, Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and
Indian Country. As of July 2009, there were 2,038 active drug court programs
and 226 in the planning stages. Research has shown that drug courts are
associated with reduced recidivism by participants and result in cost savings.
For instance, a 2006 study of nine California drug courts showed that drug
court graduates had recidivism rates of 17 percent, while a comparison group
who did not participate in drug court had recidivism rates of 41 percent. A
study of the drug court in Portland, Oregon, found that the program reduced
crime by 30 percent over 5 years and saved the county more than $79 million
over 10 years. With success stories abundant, drug courts have gained approval
at the local, state, and federal levels.

* * *

The most recent annual data from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
show that 12.2 percent of more than 14 million arrests in 2008 were for drug
violations, the most common arrest crime category. The proportion of total
drug arrests has increased over the past 20 years: in 1987, only 7.4 percent
of all arrests were for drug violations. Approximately 4 percent of all
homicides in 2008 were drug-related, a percentage that has not changed
significantly over the same 20-year period.

The characteristics of populations under correctional supervision reflect
these arrest patterns. According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), 20
percent of state prisoners and 53 percent of federal prisoners are
incarcerated because of a drug offense. Moreover, 27 percent of individuals on
probation and 37 percent of individuals on parole at the end of 2007 had
committed a drug offense.

The drug-crime link is also reflected in arrestee data. In 2008, the Arrestee
Drug Abuse Monitoring (ADAM) II program found that the median percentage of
male arrestees who tested positive in the 10 ADAM II cities for any of 10
drugs, including cocaine, marijuana, methamphetamine, opioids, and
phencyclidine (PCP), was 67.6 percent, down slightly from 69.2 percent in
2007\. Other data reflect the link as well. In 2002, a BJS survey found that
68 percent of jail inmates were dependent on or abusing drugs and alcohol and
that 55 percent had used illicit drugs during the month before their offense.
In 2004, a similar BJS self-report survey identified the drug-crime link more
precisely: 17 percent of state prisoners and 18 percent of federal prisoners
had committed their most recent offense to acquire money to buy drugs.
Property and drug offenders were more likely than violent and public-order
offenders to commit crimes for drug money.

To Top To Contents

### Impact on Productivity

Premature mortality, illness, injury leading to incapacitation, and
imprisonment all serve to directly reduce national productivity. Public
financial resources expended in the areas of health care and criminal justice
as a result of illegal drug trafficking and use are resources that would
otherwise be available for other policy initiatives.

There is a great loss of productivity associated with drug-related premature
mortality. In 2005, 26,858 deaths were unintentional or undetermined-intent
poisonings; in 2004, 95 percent of these poisonings were caused by drugs.
Although it is difficult to place a dollar value on a human life, a rough
calculation of lost productivity can be made based on the present discounted
value of a person's lifetime earnings.

There are also health-related productivity losses. An individual who enters a
residential drug treatment program or is admitted to a hospital for drug
treatment becomes incapacitated and is removed from the labor force. According
to TEDS data, there were approximately 1.8 million admissions to state-
licensed treatment facilities for illicit drug dependence or abuse in 2007.
Productivity losses in this area alone are enormous. Health-related
productivity losses are higher still when lost productivity associated with
drug-related hospital admissions (including victims of drug-related crimes) is
included.

The approximately one-quarter of offenders in state and local correctional
facilities and the more than half of offenders in federal facilities
incarcerated on drug-related charges represent an estimated 620,000
individuals who are not in the workforce. The cost of their incarceration
therefore has two components: keeping them behind bars and the results of
their nonproductivity while they are there.

Finally, there is productivity lost to drug-related unemployment and drug-
related absenteeism. According to the 2008 NSDUH, 19.6 percent of unemployed
adults may be defined as current users of illicit drugs. Based on population
estimates from the same study, this translates into approximately 1.8 million
unemployed individuals who were current drug abusers. Further, approximately 8
percent of individuals employed full time and 10.2 percent of individuals
employed part-time were current users of illicit drugs. Individuals who are
employed but have chronic absenteeism resulting from illicit drug use also
accrue substantial lost productivity.

To Top To Contents

### Impact on the Environment

The environmental impact of illicit drugs is largely the result of outdoor
cannabis cultivation and methamphetamine production. Many of the chemicals
used to produce methamphetamine are flammable, and the improper storage, use,
and disposal of such chemicals that are typical among methamphetamine
producers often lead to fires and explosions at clandestine laboratories.
Additionally, the process used to produce methamphetamine results in toxic
chemicals--between 5 and 7 pounds of waste per pound of methamphetamine--that
are typically discarded improperly in fields, streams, forests, and sewer
systems, causing extensive environmental damage.

Currently, there are no conclusive estimates regarding the nationwide cost of
methamphetamine production site remediation because many of the
methamphetamine laboratories and dumpsites in the United States are
undiscovered due to their clandestine locations. However, in California alone,
from January through December 10, 2009, the California Department of Toxic
Substance Control responded to and cleaned up 232 laboratories and dumpsites
at a cost of $776,889, or approximately $3,349 per site.

Outdoor cannabis cultivation, particularly on public lands, is causing
increasing environmental damage. Grow site operators often contaminate and
alter watersheds, clear-cut native vegetation, discard garbage and
nonbiodegradable materials at deserted sites, create wildfire hazards, and
divert natural water courses. For example, cultivators often dam streams and
redirect the water through plastic gravity-fed irrigation tubing to supply
water to individual plants. The high demand for water often strains small
streams and damages downstream vegetation that depend on consistent water
flow. In addition, law enforcement officials are increasingly encountering
dumpsites of highly toxic insecticides, chemical repellants, and poisons that
are produced in Mexico, purchased by Mexican criminal groups, and transported
into the country for use at their cannabis grow sites. These toxic chemicals
enter and contaminate ground water, pollute watersheds, kill fish and other
wildlife, and eventually enter residential water supplies. Moreover, the
National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA) reports that while preparing
land for cannabis cultivation, growers commonly clear the forest understory,
which allows nonnative plants to supplant native ones, adversely affecting the
ecosystem. They also terrace the land--especially in mountainous areas--which
results in rapid erosion.

Limited research on the environmental impact of the improper disposal of
pharmaceuticals7 indicates that contamination from dissolved pharmaceutical
drugs is present in extremely low levels in most of the nation's water supply.
The harm to aquatic life and the environment has not been determined, and
according to the Environmental Protection Agency, scientists have found no
evidence of adverse human health effects from the minute residue found in
water supplies. Nonetheless, as a precaution based on environmental research
to date, the ONDCP and the Food and Drug Administration suggest that consumers
use take-back programs to dispose of unused prescription drugs (see text box
in Vulnerabilities section).

* * *

### Footnotes

  1. Nonmedical use of prescription-type psychotherapeutics includes the nonmedical use of pain relievers, tranquilizers, stimulants, and sedatives but excludes over-the-counter drugs. 
  2. DAWN defines drug-related deaths as deaths that are natural or accidental with drug involvement, deaths involving homicide by drug, and deaths with drug involvement when the manner of death denoted by the medical examiner is "could not be determined." 
  3. Data include alcohol dependence or alcohol abuse. 
  4. The research also included antibiotics, steroids, and more than 100 pharmaceuticals. 

* * *

To Top To Contents To Previous Page To Next Page

To Publications Page To Home Page

UNCLASSIFIED

* * *

End of page.

* * *

* * *

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

