

Business Insider logo The words "Business Insider".

  * Tech
  * Finance
  * Politics
  * Strategy
  * Life
  * All

##### Tech

    
    
    * Tech Insider
    * Media
    * Science
    * Transportation
    

##### Finance

    
    
    * Finance
    * Markets Insider
    * Retail
    * Your Money
    

##### Politics

    
    
    * Politics
    * Military & Defense
    

##### Strategy

    
    
    * Strategy
    * Advertising
    * Careers
    

##### Life

    
    
    * Life
    * Coupons
    * Entertainment
    * Insider Picks
    * Sports
    

##### Featured

    
    
    * Better Capitalism
    * Embracing Disruption
    * Insider TV
    

##### Subscribe

    
    
    * BI Intelligence
    * BI Prime
    

##### About BI

    
    
    * About
    * Careers
    * Contact Us
    * Advertise
    * Contributors FAQ
    * Corporate
    * Corrections Policy
    

##### Follow BI

    
    
    * Newsletters
    * Events
    * RSS
    * Facebook
    * Twitter
    * Instagram
    * YouTube
    * LinkedIn
    

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

  * BUSINESS INSIDER
  * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
  * BI INTELLIGENCE

World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

Edition

  * BI Prime
  * Intelligence

Menu icon A vertical stack of three evenly spaced horizontal lines.

Edition

International Editions:

  * United States US

Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

  * International INTL
  * Deutschland DE
  * Australia AUS
  * France FR
  * India IN
  * Italy IT
  * Japan JP
  * Malaysia MY
  * Netherlands NL
  * Nordic SE
  * Poland PL
  * Singapore SG
  * South Africa ZA
  * Spain ES

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile. Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click
to perform a search". World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating
different international options."

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

  * BUSINESS INSIDER
  * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
  * BI INTELLIGENCE

  * Tech Enterprise Science advertising Media Transportation Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

  * Finance Markets Insider Retail Your Money Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
  * Politics Military & Defense News Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
  * Strategy Careers Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
  * Life Entertainment Travel Sports Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.
  * All
  * Coupons Target Walmart EBay Nike Container Store 

Profile icon An icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders. It often
indicates a user profile.

BI ACCOUNTS

  * BUSINESS INSIDER
  * BI PRIME SIGN OUT
  * BI INTELLIGENCE

World globe An icon of the world globe, indicating different international
options."

Edition

US INTL DE AUS FR IN IT JP MY NL SE PL SG ZA ES Business Insider logo The
words "Business Insider". Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter
icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word
"in". YouTube icon A play button in the shape of a television screen.
Instagram icon A stylized camera.

  * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights reserved. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our 
  * Terms of Service , Privacy Policy and Cookies Policy . 

  * Sitemap

  * Disclaimer
  * Commerce Policy
  * Coupons
  * Made in NYC
  * Stock quotes by finanzen.net

Search icon A magnifying glass. It indicates, "Click to perform a search".
Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification.

# We took a scientific look at whether weed or alcohol is worse for you — and

there appears to be a winner

Erin Brodwin

Aug. 28, 2018, 9:08 AM

Facebook Icon The letter F. Link icon An image of a chain link. It symobilizes
a website link url. Email icon An envelope. It indicates the ability to send
an email. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn
icon The word "in". Fliboard icon A stylized letter F.

More icon Three evenly spaced dots forming an ellipsis: "...". Close icon Two
crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an interaction, or
dismiss a notification.

List icon A bulleted list of stacked lines. Double angles pointing left Two
angles facing left, which often indicate, "return to the beginning." Double
angles pointing right Two angles facing right, which often indicate, "advance
to the end."

![drinking smoking

partying](https://amp.businessinsider.com/images/5a09f6483dbef4ae448b56b7-750-563.jpg)
Shutterstock

  * **Marijuana and alcohol have long been portrayed as relatively similar vices with a variety of risks and a few benefits.**
  * **Based on the available peer-reviewed scientific research, however, one appears to pose more health risks overall.**
  * **That said, there are dozens of health factors to consider when comparing the substances -- from one's family medical history to the legality of each drug.**

* * *

Which is worse for you: weed or whiskey?

It's a tough call, but based on the peer-reviewed science, there appears to be
a clear answer.

Keep in mind that there are dozens of factors to account for when comparing
the health effects of alcohol and marijuana, including how the substances
affect your heart, brain, and behavior, and how likely you are to get hooked.

Time is important, too -- while some effects are noticeable immediately,
others only begin to crop up after months or years of use.

_**Never miss out on healthcare news. Subscribe to Dispensed, our weekly
newsletter on pharma, biotech, and healthcare.**_

The comparison is slightly unfair for another reason: While scientists have
been researching the effects of alcohol for decades, the science of cannabis
is murkier because of its mostly illegal status.

Here's what we know about which substance is more harmful.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 1/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## A large new study suggested that for people between the ages of 15 and 49

years old worldwide, alcohol was the leading risk factor for death in 2016.

Smile19/Shutterstock

A large review published in August in the medical journal The Lancet found
that among people aged 15-49, alcohol use was the leading health risk factor
across the globe in 2016, with 3.8% of all female deaths and 12·2% of all male
deaths attributable to alcohol use.

The review looked at published data from nearly 600 studies that comprised
data on 195 countries and territories between 1990 and 2016. The results
showed that among people of all ages, alcohol was the seventh leading risk
factor for deaths in 2016.

The more people drank across the globe, the more their risk of dying and their
risk of cancer rose, the study authors found. As a result of these findings,
they concluded that there was no "safe" level of alcohol consumption.

"Alcohol use is a leading risk factor for global disease burden and causes
substantial health loss," the researchers wrote in their paper, "and the level
of consumption that minimizes health loss is zero."

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 2/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## More than 30,700 Americans died from alcohol-induced causes in 2014. There

have been zero documented deaths from marijuana use alone.

Gerardo Garcia/Reuters

In 2014, 30,722 people died from alcohol-induced causes in the US -- and that
does not count drinking-related accidents or homicides. If those deaths were
included, the number would be closer to 90,000, according to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.

Meanwhile, no deaths from marijuana overdoses have been reported, according to
the Drug Enforcement Administration. A 16-year study of more than 65,000
Americans, published in the American Journal of Public Health, found that
healthy marijuana users were not more likely to die earlier than healthy
people who did not use cannabis.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 3/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Marijuana appears to be significantly less addictive than alcohol.

Shutterstock

Close to half of all adults have tried marijuana at least once, making it one
of the most widely used illegal drugs -- yet research suggests that a
relatively small percentage of people become addicted.

For a 1994 survey, epidemiologists at the National Institute on Drug Abuse
asked more than 8,000 people from ages 15 to 64 about their drug use. Of those
who had tried marijuana at least once, roughly 9% eventually fit a diagnosis
of addiction. For alcohol, the figure was about 15%. To put that in
perspective, the addiction rate for cocaine was 17%, while heroin was 23% and
nicotine was 32%.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 4/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Marijuana may be harder on your heart, while moderate drinking could be

beneficial.

Flickr/maxbraun

Unlike alcohol, which slows your heart rate, marijuana speeds it up, which
could negatively affect the heart in the short term. Still, the largest-ever
report on cannabis from the National Academies of Sciences, released in
January, found insufficient evidence to support or refute the idea that
cannabis may increase the overall risk of a heart attack.

On the other hand, low to moderate drinking -- about one drink a day -- has
been linked with a lower risk of heart attack and stroke compared with
abstention. James Nicholls, a director at Alcohol Research UK, told The
Guardian that those findings should be taken with a grain of salt since "any
protective effects tend to be canceled out by even occasional bouts of heavier
drinking."

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 5/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Alcohol is strongly linked with several types of cancer; marijuana is not.

Silvia Izquierdo/AP

In November 2017, a group of the nation's top cancer doctors issued a
statement asking people to drink less. They cited strong evidence that
drinking alcohol -- as little as a glass of wine or beer a day-- increases the
risk of developing both pre- and postmenopausal breast cancer.

The US Department of Health lists alcohol as a known human carcinogen.
Research highlighted by the National Cancer Institute suggests that the more
alcohol you drink -- particularly the more you drink _regularly_ \-- the
higher your risk of developing cancer.

For marijuana, some research initially suggested a link between smoking and
lung cancer, but that has been debunked. The January report found that
cannabis was not connected to any increased risk of the lung cancers or head
and neck cancers tied to smoking cigarettes.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 6/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Both drugs may be linked with risks while driving, but alcohol is worse.

Unsplash / Michael Discenza

A research note published by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (PDF) found that, when adjusting for other factors, having a
detectable amount of THC (the main psychoactive ingredient in cannabis) in
your blood did not increase the risk of being involved in a car crash. Having
a blood-alcohol level of at least 0.05%, on the other hand, increased that
risk by 575%.

Still, combining the two appears to have the worst results.

"The risk from driving under the influence of both alcohol and cannabis is
greater than the risk of driving under the influence of either alone," the
authors of a 2009 review wrote in the American Journal of Addiction.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 7/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Several studies link alcohol with violence, particularly at home. That has

not been found for cannabis.

Matilde Campodonico/AP

It's impossible to say whether drinking alcohol or using marijuana _causes_
violence, but several studies -- including a recent analysis published in the
journal Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience-- suggest a link
between alcohol and violent behavior.

For the study, which was published in January, researchers used fMRI scans to
see how two alcoholic drinks impacts brain function in 50 healthy adult males.
Compared with sober participants, the intoxicated volunteers were found to
have reduced functioning in the prefrontal cortex, an area of the brain linked
with moderating social behavior. That reduced functioning was also linked with
aggressive behavior.

The finding aligns with some previous research on alcohol's connections with
violence. According to the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence,
alcohol is a factor in 40% of all violent crimes, and a study of college
students found that the rates of mental and physical abuse were higher on days
when couples drank.

On the other hand, no such relationship appears to exist for cannabis. A
recent study looking at cannabis use and intimate partner violence in the
first decade of marriage found that marijuana users were significantly _less_
likely to commit violence against a partner than those who did not use the
drug.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 8/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Both drugs negatively affect your memory, but in different ways. These

effects are the most common in heavy, frequent, or binge users.

Kristoffer Trolle/flickr

Both weed and alcohol temporarily impair memory, and alcohol can cause
blackouts by rendering the brain incapable of forming memories. The most
severe long-term effects are seen in heavy, chronic, or binge users who begin
using in their teens.

Studies have found that these effects can persist for several weeks after
stopping marijuana use. There may also be a link between daily weed use and
poorer verbal memory in adults who start smoking at a young age.

Chronic drinkers display reductions in memory, attention, and planning, as
well as impaired emotional processes and social cognition -- and these can
persist even after years of abstinence.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 9/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Both drugs are linked with an increased risk of psychiatric disease. For

weed users, psychosis and schizophrenia are the main concern; with booze, it's
depression and anxiety.

iStock

The largest review of marijuana studies found substantial evidence of an
increased risk among frequent marijuana users of developing schizophrenia --
something that studies have shown is a particular concern for people already
at risk.

Weed can also trigger temporary feelings of paranoia and hostility, but it's
not yet clear whether those symptoms are linked with an increased risk of
long-term psychosis.

On the other hand, self-harm and suicide are much more common among people who
binge drink or drink frequently. But scientists have had a hard time
deciphering whether excessive alcohol use causes depression and anxiety or
whether people with depression and anxiety drink in an attempt to relieve
those symptoms.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 10/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## Alcohol appears to be linked more closely with weight gain, despite weed's

tendency to trigger the munchies.

Melia Robinson/Business Insider

Weed gives you the munchies. It makes you hungry, reduces the natural signals
of fullness, and may even temporarily make food taste better.

But despite eating over 600 extra calories when smoking, marijuana users
generally don't have higher body-mass indexes. In fact, studies suggest that
regular smokers have a slightly reduced risk of obesity.

Alcohol, on the other hand, appears to be linked with weight gain. A study
published in the American Journal of Preventative Medicine found that people
who drank heavily had a higher risk of becoming overweight or obese. Plus,
alcohol itself is caloric: A can of beer has roughly 150 calories, and a glass
of wine has about 120.

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options. 11/ Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section
or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.

## All things considered, alcohol's effects seem markedly more extreme — and

riskier — than marijuana's.

iStock

When it comes to addiction profiles, risk of death or overdose, and links to
cancer, car crashes, violence, and obesity, the research suggests that
marijuana may be less of a health risk than alcohol.

Still, because of marijuana's largely illegal status, long-term studies on all
its health effects have been limited -- meaning more research is needed.

Triangle icon It can indicate: previous / next navigation options, or an
expandable section, or sometimes playable media. Previous 1/ Next Triangle
icon It can indicate: previous / next navigation options, or an expandable
section, or sometimes playable media.

### SEE ALSO: Heineken is betting on a brew made with marijuana instead of

alcohol, and it could help give a boost to the struggling beer industry

### DON'T MISS: DNA-testing company 23andMe has signed a $300 million deal

with a drug giant. Here's how to delete your data if that freaks you out.

More: Health Cannabis Alcohol Addiction

  * Heart disease
  * Brain
  * body
  * Features
  * BI Innovation
  * Disease
  * Drinking
  * Dispensed

Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous
/ next navigation options.

### Popular

#### Raptors players told their fans to stop heckling Kevin Durant after he

re-injured his calf and it ended in a standing ovation for the Warriors
superstar

### Popular

#### The male player who said Serena Williams showed 'bad personality' joked

that he wanted to play doubles with her at Wimbledon

### Popular

#### Video appears to show helicopter that crashed into New York skyscraper

swirling and diving minutes before it came down

### Popular

#### Forget the trade war — a bigger conflict between the US and China is

playing out right under our noses

### Popular

#### FedEx ditching Amazon is a 'watershed moment' that has huge implications

for the future of logistics

Close icon Two crossed lines that form an 'X'. It indicates a way to close an
interaction, or dismiss a notification. Check mark icon A check mark. It
indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction.

Follow us on: Facebook Icon The letter F. Twitter icon A stylized bird with an
open mouth, tweeting. LinkedIn icon The word "in". YouTube icon A play button
in the shape of a television screen. Instagram icon A stylized camera.

Also check out:

  * Copyright (C) 2019 Insider Inc. All rights reserved. Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our 
  * Terms of Service , Privacy Policy and Cookies Policy . 

  * Sitemap

  * Disclaimer
  * Commerce Policy
  * Coupons
  * Made in NYC
  * Stock quotes by finanzen.net

Edition

International Editions:

  * United States US

Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended
interaction.

  * International INTL
  * Deutschland DE
  * Australia AUS
  * France FR
  * India IN
  * Italy IT
  * Japan JP
  * Malaysia MY
  * Netherlands NL
  * Nordic SE
  * Poland PL
  * Singapore SG
  * South Africa ZA
  * Spain ES

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

