

IM **Subscribe Now / register** IM **Subscribe Now**

Login

Home Home Created with Sketch.

  * IM **Subscribe Now** IM **Subscribe Now**
  * Login
  * Please wait....

  *   * News 

    * UK 

    * World 

    * US 

    * UK Politics 

    * Brexit 

    * Final Say 

    * Science 

    * Environment 

    * Health 

    * Education 

    * Tech 

    * Business 

    * InFact 

  * Politics 

    * Brexit 

    * Conservatives 

    * Labour 

    * Lib Dems 

    * SNP 

    * Change UK 

    * DUP 

    * US Politics 

    * Theresa May 

    * Jeremy Corbyn 

  * Voices 

    * Final Say 

    * Drop The Target 

    * Editorials 

    * Shappi Khorsandi 

    * Robert Fisk 

    * Mark Steel 

    * Chuka Umunna 

    * Mary Dejevsky 

    * Matthew Norman 

    * John Rentoul 

  * Final Say 

    * Sign the petition 
  * Sport 

    * Football 

    * Rugby union 

    * Cricket 

    * F1 

    * Boxing 

    * Tennis 

    * Cycling 

    * Golf 

    * Jonathan Liew 

    * Miguel Delaney 

    * Podcast 

  * Culture 

    * Film 

    * Music 

    * TV & radio 

    * Game of Thrones 

    * Books 

    * Art 

    * Photography 

    * Theatre & dance 

    * Geoffrey Macnab 

    * Podcast 

    * Crosswords & puzzles 

  * Video 

  * Indy/Life 

    * Travel 

    * Women 

    * Fashion & beauty 

    * Food & drink 

    * Dating & relationships 

    * Health & fitness 

    * Tech 

    * Money 

    * Design & home 

    * Motoring 

  * Happy List 

  * IndyBest 

    * Home & garden 

    * Kids 

    * Books 

    * Travel & outdoors 

    * Fashion & beauty 

    * Food & drink 

    * Tech 

    * Sports & fitness 

  * Long Reads 

  * indy100 

  * Vouchers 

    * TUI 

    * Groupon 

    * Argos 

    * Hyperoptic 

    * Just Eat 

    * Currys 

    * Nike 

    * Travelodge 

    * National Trust 

    * boohoo 

  * Minds 

    * Andy Grice 

    * Chris Blackhurst 

    * Hamish McRae 

    * Janet Street-Porter 

    * Mary Dejevsky 

    * Matthew Norman 

  * Please wait....

  *     * UK Edition
    * US Edition

**Subscribe Now** **Subscribe Now**

  * News 

    * InFact 

    * UK 

    * US 

    * World 

    * Politics 

    * Final Say 

    * Science 

    * Education 

    * Environment 

    * Health 

    * Long reads 

    * Business 

    * Obituaries 

  * Politics 

    * Brexit 

    * Conservatives 

    * Labour 

    * Lib Dems 

    * SNP 

    * DUP 

    * Ukip 

    * US Politics 

    * Theresa May 

    * Jeremy Corbyn 

  * Voices 

    * Robert Fisk 

    * Mark Steel 

    * Janet Street-Porter 

    * John Rentoul 

    * Jenny Éclair 

    * Chuka Ummuna 

    * Shappi Khorsandi 

    * Editorials 

    * Letters 

  * Final Say 

    * Gina Miller 

    * Our view 

    * Sign the petition 

    * Spread the word 

    * Steve Coogan 

  * Sport 

    * Football 

    * Rugby union 

    * Cricket 

    * Tennis 

    * Golf 

    * Motor racing 

    * Cycling 

    * US sports 

    * Rugby League 

  * Culture 

    * Books 

    * Film 

    * TV 

    * Music 

    * Art 

    * Theatre & dance 

    * Geoffrey Macnab 

    * Podcast 

    * Crosswords & puzzles 

  * Indy/life 

    * Travel 

    * Fashion & beauty 

    * Food & drink 

    * Health & fitness 

    * Love & relationships 

    * Tech 

    * iPhone 

    * Tech news 

    * Tech culture 

    * Gaming 

    * Cryptocurrency 

    * Design & home 

    * Motoring 

    * Women 

  * Video 

    * News videos 

    * Explainer videos 

    * Sport videos 

    * People + culture videos 

  * IndyBest 

    * Sports & Fitness 

    * Home & Garden 

    * Kids 

    * Books 

    * Fashion & Beauty 

    * Food & Drink 

    * Travel & Outdoors 

    * Tech 

  * Money 

    * Mortgages 

    * Loans 

    * Savings 

    * Pensions 

    * Money transfers 

    * Health insurance 

    * Money Deals 

  * indy100 

  * Extras 

    * Corrections 

    * Competitions & offers 

    * Puzzles 

    * Crosswords 

    * Apps 

    * The Independent Books 

    * Jobs 

    * Voucher Codes 

  * Minds 

    * Minds Articles 

    * Subscription offers 

    * Subscription sign in 

    * Read latest edition 

  * UK Edition 

    * UK Edition

    * US Edition

Please wait....

Log in using your social  
network account

OR

Log in directly with  
The Independent

{{message}}

Please enter an email address Please enter a valid email address Please enter
a valid email address

Please enter a valid password

Keep me logged in

Submit

Forgotten your password?

Try Independent Minds  
free for 1 month

See the options

Hi {{fullName}}

  * My Independent Minds
  * Account details
  * Help centre
  * Logout

News > UK > Home News

Close

London schoolchildren were sent to deal from crackhouses as far away as
Scotland

# Gangs recruiting children as young as 12 as Class A drug dealers

##

Vast majority of police forces now arresting under-16s for crack, heroin or
cocaine dealing

  * Adam Lusher
  * Friday 14 July 2017 21:12 {{^moreThanTen}}

  * {{total}} comments {{/moreThanTen}}

  * 

Click to follow  
The Independent

Children in almost all areas of the country are being arrested for dealing
Class A drugs, including crack, heroin and cocaine, _The Independent_ can
reveal.

Criminals are turning to children as young as 12 to peddle hard drugs,
according to police arrest records.

Freedom of Information requests to police forces in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland revealed that in 2016, 71 per cent of forces arrested
children under the age of 16 on suspicion of supplying crack, heroin or
cocaine.

### We’ll tell you what’s true. You can form your own view.

From 15p €0.18 $0.18 USD 0.27 a day, more exclusives, analysis and extras.

Subscribe now

When all types of Class A substances were considered, the proportion of forces
arresting under-16s for hard-drug dealing last year rose to 86 per cent – 30
out of the 35 forces who supplied useable information.

## Watch more

  * The 15-year-old who sells drugs before school

Further investigations produced suggestions that children as young as eight
are being sucked into a world of drug dealing where gangs use torture as a
means of asserting their authority, and knives, Tasers, boiling water and acid
as weapons.

_The Independent_ has been told of London schoolchildren being sent to deal
from crackhouses as far away as Scotland, with the girls sometimes being raped
and “owned” by male gang members.

By the age of 14, some child drug dealers are “already seasoned. [They have]
done lots of things, sold lots of drugs and been in lots of traumatising
situations”.

In Nottingham, former teenage drug dealers spoke of facing junkies wielding
“Rambo knives”, and becoming so used to violence that one of them viewed
punishment beatings as “just business”.

“My concern is that this is the next child exploitation scandal,” said one
adult working with gangs.

The revelations come after a report by MPs also raised fears about drugs gangs
exploiting minors who go missing from home or care, and called for such
children to be treated as victims of grooming rather than criminals.

The All-Party Parliamentary Group on Runaway and Missing Children and Adults
warned: “Patterns of grooming of children for criminal exploitation are very
similar to those of sexual exploitation. In the past, child sexual
exploitation was often perceived amongst professionals as the victim’s fault,
or due to their risky behaviour.

“Vulnerable young people who are trafficked and exploited by gangs to
distribute drugs are still too often perceived to have ‘made a choice’ and are
therefore criminalised rather than safeguarded and recognised as victims of
the gangs who control them.

“Prevention of children being groomed and exploited in this context should be
seen as the top priority for local and national decision makers.”

## Read more

  * Campaigners say new Government drug strategy 'same failed old recipe'

The information supplied by police to _The Independent _suggests that whereas
before the substances peddled by child pushers might have been “soft” drugs
like cannabis, violent criminal gangs are now luring younger and younger
children into dealing harder and harder drugs.

Twenty-two forces – 63 per cent – arrested suspected Class A dealers aged 14
or younger, and eight – nearly one in four – detained 13 year olds on
suspicion of pushing hard drugs.

Recorded incidents included a 13-year-old boy arrested on suspicion of
supplying crack and heroin in Norwich, a suspected 13-year-old heroin dealer
in South Yorkshire, and 13-year-old suspected cocaine dealers in the West
Midlands, Lancashire and Kent.

The youngest child involved was a 12-year-old boy, arrested in Dorset for
possession of a Class A drug with intent to supply. Police did not recover any
controlled substances, so the boy was not charged, but “advice was given”.

Outside the Class A category, Humberside Police reported that they had
received an anonymous tip-off that a nine-year-old girl was supplying
cannabis.

Detectives were unable to substantiate the allegation, but the suggestion that
dealers were now so young was echoed by charity and gang-intervention workers,
who admitted to being alarmed at the extreme youth of some of the children
involved.

“It starts as low as eight,” said Caroline Shearer, of the Clacton, Essex-
based charity Only Cowards Carry, “Moving drugs on the street, a little packet
from outside the fast food restaurant to drop off at the budget hotel.

“And if the child loses that package, he gets beaten for losing it. And if he
gets caught in another gang’s area, they beat him for being on their turf, and
take the package. Then the child goes back to his gang and gets beaten up for
getting beaten up.

“There’s no decency, no scruples, no mercy. It’s an evil, vicious circle.”

Global commission calls for legalisation of drugs

Just how vicious was suggested by Colin James, the founder of London-based
Gangs Unite.

When _The Independent_ spoke to Mr James, 47, a former gang member who now
works to stop young people making the same mistakes he did, he had just been
trying to help a 16-year-old girl.

“She’s been raped,” he said. “She’s got links to four gangs. She’s ‘owned’ by
a boy from each gang – as in, ‘I’m a senior gang member, I like a girl, I’ve
claimed her, she’s mine’.

“The girls submit to that. They may be used like a mattress, but protection,
and all those things that are offered by the gang, they prefer that to their
own value and self-worth.

“It’s horrific, but they can’t see it.”

The 16-year-old girl, he said, had been “sent all over the place”.

Mr James added: “They found her in Scotland once. It’s quite a normal thing
for young people. We have got quite a few minors who have gone missing for
days.

## Read more

  * UN and WHO call for drugs to be decriminalised

“They send them up to crackhouses. Sometimes the girls are up there for just
sexual reasons, but 99.9 per cent of the time, it’s selling drugs.”

The National Crime Agency (NCA) calls this increasingly prevalent gangland
practice “county lines”. A gang in a big urban centre expands into county
towns by means of a “deal line”.

The mobile phone number is controlled from the urban base, while foot soldiers
are sent from the city or recruited in the county town.

Drug users in the county town phone the city-based deal line. Orders are then
sent to the foot soldiers in the town, who deliver the crack, heroin or
cocaine.

For the gangs, it helps if the foot soldiers are children: cheap, expendable,
easily controlled, with the added benefit of often being able to operate under
the police’s radar.

Some gangs seek children without a criminal record. Others, the NCA noted in
its November county lines report, targeted white British children “because
groups believe they are less likely to be targeted by law enforcement”.

They put the children in “cuckooed addresses”, often crackhouses taken over by
whatever violence and intimidation was necessary.

“Instances of firearms being kept visible at cuckooed addresses to intimidate
victims were reported,” said the NCA, “As well as drugs users being seriously
assaulted or even tortured as a show of strength to other users and gangs.”

County lines drugs markets are now operating 24 hours a day, the NCA said.
“Returns from 2016 indicate a considerable increase in law enforcement
awareness of the use of children … 80 per cent of areas saw the exploitation
of children by gangs.”

Possible glimpses of this appeared in the FoI returns: the 14-year-old boy
arrested by British Transport Police in Eastbourne, East Sussex, in connection
with 15 wraps of cocaine and a brown powder thought to be heroin; the 15-year-
old girl arrested in Bedford in November on suspicion of supplying cocaine,
who was “processed on behalf of another force”.

For the gangs, it means, according to NCA figures, an average of £2,000 a day
for every county lines operation they set up.

## Shape Created with Sketch. World's 10 deadliest street drugs

Show all 10

left Created with Sketch. right Created with Sketch.

# Shape Created with Sketch. World's 10 deadliest street drugs

## 1/10 Whoonga

Whoonga is a combination of antiretroviral drugs, used to treat HIV, and
various cutting agents such as detergents and poisons. The drug is widely
available in South Africa due to South Africa’s high rate of HIV sufferers,
and is believed to be popular due to how cheap it is when compared to
prescribed antiretrovirals. The drug is highly addictive and can cause major
health issues such as internal bleeding, stomach ulcers and ultimately death

Getty

## 2/10 Scopolamine

Scopolamine is a derivative from the nightshade plant found in the Northern
Indian region of South America (Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela). It is
generally found in a refined powder form, but can also be found as a tea. The
drug is more often used by criminals due its high toxicity level (one gram is
believed to be able to kill up to 20 people) making it a strong poison.
However, it is also believed that the drug is blown into the faces of
unexpecting victims, later causing them to lose all sense of self-control and
becoming incapable of forming memories during the time they are under the
influence of the drug. This tactic has reportedly been used by gangs in
Colombia where there have been reports of people using scopolamine as way to
convince victims to rob their own homes

## 3/10 Heroin

Founded in 1874 by C. R. Alder Wright, heroin is one of the world’s oldest
drugs. Originally it was prescribed as a strong painkiller used to treat
chronic pain and physical trauma. However in 1971 it was made illegal under
the Misuse of Drugs Act. Since then it has become one of the most destructive
substances in the world, tearing apart communities and destroying families.
The side effects of heroin include inflammation of the gums, cold sweats, a
weak immune system, muscular weakness and insomnia. It can also damage blood
vessels which can later cause gangrene if left untreated

## 4/10 Crack cocaine

Crack cocaine first came about in the 1980’s when cocaine became a widespread
commodity within the drug trafficking world. Originally cocaine would have
attracted a high price tag due to its rarity and difficulty to produce, but
once it became more widespread the price dropped significantly. This resulted
in drug dealers forming their cocaine into rock like shapes by using baking
soda as a way of distilling the powder down into rock form. People were doing
this because it allowed for them to sell cocaine at a lower quantity and to a
higher number of people. The side effects of crack cocaine include liver,
kidney and lung damage, as well as permanent damage to blood vessels, which
can often lead to heart attacks, strokes, and ultimately death

## 5/10 Crystal meth

Not just famous because of a certain Walter H White, but also because it is
one of the most destructive drugs in the world. First developed in 1887, it
became widely used during the Second World War when both sides would give it
to their troops to keep them awake. It is also believed that the Japanese gave
it to their Kamikaze pilots before their suicide missions. After the war
crystal meth was prescribed as a diet aid and remained legal until the 1970s.
Since then it has fallen into the hands of Mexican gangs and has become a
worldwide phenomenon, spreading throughout Europe and Asia. The effects of
crystal meth are devastating. In the short-term users will become sleep
depraved and anxious, and in the long-term it will cause their flesh to sink,
as well as brain damage and damage of the blood vessels

## 6/10 AH-7921

AH-7921 is a synthetic opioid that was previously available to legally
purchase online from vendors until it became a Class A in January 2015. The
drug is believed to have 80% of the potency of morphine, and became known as
the ‘legal heroin’. While there has only been one death related to AH-7921 in
the UK, it is believed to be highly dangerous and capable of causing
respiratory arrest and gangrene

## 7/10 Flakka

Flakka is a stimulant with a similar chemical make-up to the amphetamine-like
drug found in bath salts. While the drug was originally marketed as a legal
high alternative to ecstasy, the effects are significantly different. The user
will feel an elevated heart rate, enhanced emotions, and, if enough is
digested, strong hallucinations. The drug can cause permanent psychological
damage due to it affecting the mood regulating neurons that keep the mind’s
serotonin and dopamine in check, as well as possibly causing heart failure

## 8/10 Bath salts

Bath salts are a synthetic crystalline drug that is prevalent in the US. While
they may sound harmless, they certainly aren’t the sort of salts you drop into
a warm bath when having a relaxing night in, they are most similar to
mephedrone, and have recently been featured throughout social media due to the
‘zombification’ of its. The name comes from the fact that the drug was
originally sold online, and widely disguised as bath salts. The side effects
include unusual psychiatric behaviour, psychosis, panic attacks and violent
behaviour, as well as the possibility of a heart attack and an elevated body
temperature

## 9/10 Purple Drank

One of the more unusual drugs around at the moment, purple drank was
popularised in 90s hip hop culture, with the likes of Jay Z and Big Moe all
mentioning it in their songs. It is a concoction of soda water, sweets and
cold medicine, and is drunk due to cold medicines high codeine content, which
gives the user a woozy feeling. However it can also cause respiratory issues
and heart failure

## 10/10 Krokodil

Krokodil is Russia’s secret addiction. It is believed that over one million
Russians are addicted to the drug. Users of krokodil are attracted to the drug
due to its low price; it is sold at £20 a gram while heroin is sold for £60.
However, krokodil is considered more dangerous than heroin because it is often
homemade, with ingredients including painkillers, iodine, lighter fluid and
industrial cleaning agents. This chemical make-up makes the drug highly
dangerous and likely to cause gangrene, and eventually rotting of the flesh

## 1/10 Whoonga

Whoonga is a combination of antiretroviral drugs, used to treat HIV, and
various cutting agents such as detergents and poisons. The drug is widely
available in South Africa due to South Africa’s high rate of HIV sufferers,
and is believed to be popular due to how cheap it is when compared to
prescribed antiretrovirals. The drug is highly addictive and can cause major
health issues such as internal bleeding, stomach ulcers and ultimately death

Getty

## 2/10 Scopolamine

Scopolamine is a derivative from the nightshade plant found in the Northern
Indian region of South America (Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela). It is
generally found in a refined powder form, but can also be found as a tea. The
drug is more often used by criminals due its high toxicity level (one gram is
believed to be able to kill up to 20 people) making it a strong poison.
However, it is also believed that the drug is blown into the faces of
unexpecting victims, later causing them to lose all sense of self-control and
becoming incapable of forming memories during the time they are under the
influence of the drug. This tactic has reportedly been used by gangs in
Colombia where there have been reports of people using scopolamine as way to
convince victims to rob their own homes

## 3/10 Heroin

Founded in 1874 by C. R. Alder Wright, heroin is one of the world’s oldest
drugs. Originally it was prescribed as a strong painkiller used to treat
chronic pain and physical trauma. However in 1971 it was made illegal under
the Misuse of Drugs Act. Since then it has become one of the most destructive
substances in the world, tearing apart communities and destroying families.
The side effects of heroin include inflammation of the gums, cold sweats, a
weak immune system, muscular weakness and insomnia. It can also damage blood
vessels which can later cause gangrene if left untreated

## 4/10 Crack cocaine

Crack cocaine first came about in the 1980’s when cocaine became a widespread
commodity within the drug trafficking world. Originally cocaine would have
attracted a high price tag due to its rarity and difficulty to produce, but
once it became more widespread the price dropped significantly. This resulted
in drug dealers forming their cocaine into rock like shapes by using baking
soda as a way of distilling the powder down into rock form. People were doing
this because it allowed for them to sell cocaine at a lower quantity and to a
higher number of people. The side effects of crack cocaine include liver,
kidney and lung damage, as well as permanent damage to blood vessels, which
can often lead to heart attacks, strokes, and ultimately death

## 5/10 Crystal meth

Not just famous because of a certain Walter H White, but also because it is
one of the most destructive drugs in the world. First developed in 1887, it
became widely used during the Second World War when both sides would give it
to their troops to keep them awake. It is also believed that the Japanese gave
it to their Kamikaze pilots before their suicide missions. After the war
crystal meth was prescribed as a diet aid and remained legal until the 1970s.
Since then it has fallen into the hands of Mexican gangs and has become a
worldwide phenomenon, spreading throughout Europe and Asia. The effects of
crystal meth are devastating. In the short-term users will become sleep
depraved and anxious, and in the long-term it will cause their flesh to sink,
as well as brain damage and damage of the blood vessels

## 6/10 AH-7921

AH-7921 is a synthetic opioid that was previously available to legally
purchase online from vendors until it became a Class A in January 2015. The
drug is believed to have 80% of the potency of morphine, and became known as
the ‘legal heroin’. While there has only been one death related to AH-7921 in
the UK, it is believed to be highly dangerous and capable of causing
respiratory arrest and gangrene

## 7/10 Flakka

Flakka is a stimulant with a similar chemical make-up to the amphetamine-like
drug found in bath salts. While the drug was originally marketed as a legal
high alternative to ecstasy, the effects are significantly different. The user
will feel an elevated heart rate, enhanced emotions, and, if enough is
digested, strong hallucinations. The drug can cause permanent psychological
damage due to it affecting the mood regulating neurons that keep the mind’s
serotonin and dopamine in check, as well as possibly causing heart failure

## 8/10 Bath salts

Bath salts are a synthetic crystalline drug that is prevalent in the US. While
they may sound harmless, they certainly aren’t the sort of salts you drop into
a warm bath when having a relaxing night in, they are most similar to
mephedrone, and have recently been featured throughout social media due to the
‘zombification’ of its. The name comes from the fact that the drug was
originally sold online, and widely disguised as bath salts. The side effects
include unusual psychiatric behaviour, psychosis, panic attacks and violent
behaviour, as well as the possibility of a heart attack and an elevated body
temperature

## 9/10 Purple Drank

One of the more unusual drugs around at the moment, purple drank was
popularised in 90s hip hop culture, with the likes of Jay Z and Big Moe all
mentioning it in their songs. It is a concoction of soda water, sweets and
cold medicine, and is drunk due to cold medicines high codeine content, which
gives the user a woozy feeling. However it can also cause respiratory issues
and heart failure

## 10/10 Krokodil

Krokodil is Russia’s secret addiction. It is believed that over one million
Russians are addicted to the drug. Users of krokodil are attracted to the drug
due to its low price; it is sold at £20 a gram while heroin is sold for £60.
However, krokodil is considered more dangerous than heroin because it is often
homemade, with ingredients including painkillers, iodine, lighter fluid and
industrial cleaning agents. This chemical make-up makes the drug highly
dangerous and likely to cause gangrene, and eventually rotting of the flesh

For the children, it can mean, as reported to the Catch22 charity by a police
officer who feared children were being recruited from within a school:
“They’ll end up in a crackhouse somewhere in their school uniform, for days
upon days, and promised loads of money that they never see.”

“Seventy per cent of areas,” noted the NCA, “reported violence towards other
members of the gang, usually runners, when they made mistakes or were accused
of stealing.”

“The type of violence adopted by gangs,” added the report “[was] dependent
upon the prevalent gang and their chosen style. Knives are the most common
weapon. Bats, hammers, Tasers, boiling water and acid are also noted.”

In Bristol, Helen Rosenthal, the manager of Catch22’s Dawes Unit, which
researches ways to reduce the harm caused by gangs, is growing increasingly
worried.

“The county lines problem is coming to be seen everywhere,” she said. “In
Bristol, we have seen looked-after children going missing and returning with
worrying signs like having no sense of where they have been, but having money
in their pockets.

## Read more

  * Man who took new form of MDMA dies as four others fight for life

“My concern is that this is the next child exploitation scandal.”

Just how easily some children can be groomed or exploited was revealed by her
colleague Jamal Forrest, 34, originally from the inner-city area of Winson
Green, Birmingham. Recruited himself at the age of 15, he soon became one of
the recruiters.

Now he speaks with the sadness of a man who has been shot three times, who has
seen the grief of mothers after they have lost sons to gang violence, and who
must live every day with the remorse at some of the things he did.

“It’s like a recruitment agency,” he admits. “When you look at these young
people, you see business opportunities.

“They are attracted to trinkets. You can give them money, alcohol…”

And you only need to recruit one child yourself: “Once you have got that one
young person around you, because of their social circles, they can do the
recruiting for you. It’s a domino effect.”

The false glamour and material wealth of a gangster, he says, “attract like
something shiny to a magpie. They are drawn to a lifestyle of no benefit to
their soul.”

As shown by the experiences of former schoolboy drug dealers in Nottingham.

“You are young, you are naive” says “Peter”, now 25 and not long out of
prison. “You think the rewards outweigh the risks.”

Peter – not his real name – grew up in St Ann’s, Nottingham, at a time when
the main road going through the area was acquiring the nickname “Death Mile”
because of all the gang-related shootings that had occurred along it.

He “knew of” his father, but never knew him. By the age of 12, he was in care,
“a very, very angry child” – the prefect target, perhaps, for the “domino
effect” described by Mr Forrest.

America’s Heroin Epidemic: the election issue no one is talking about

Aged 15, he saw older teenagers who had been dealing for a while.

“They’ve got trainers, cars, everything you wanted to buy,” he said.

“I knew friends. I saw what they were doing and wanted to be part of it,
wanted to be able to buy myself nice things and not be struggling.

“I asked one of my mates. He told me who to talk to. I was straight out there
selling drugs.”

Dealing cannabis, crack and heroin, he carried a kitchen steak knife “for
safety”. It was of limited use with one junkie, who had ordered a 0.2g wrap of
heroin and a 0.2g wrap of crack.

## Read more

  * Let students use study drugs and sell them at Boots says top scientist

Instead of pulling out a £20 note to pay for the drugs, said Peter, “He pulled
out this 10in Rambo knife.”

At about the same time, “David” was experiencing similar violence, in the same
part of Nottingham.

“I was a good kid,” he says, “Manners, the works. I grew up in a church,
grandmother used to take us there as kids.”

But he saw a friend earning £200 a day selling crack and heroin. He too wanted
to be able to “go to town and buy two pairs of trainers for £90 each”.

To the family with whom he was staying, it seemed as if 15-year-old David was
getting up every day at 7am, and pedalling away on his bike for a healthy gym
session before school.

In fact he was heading out with up to 80 wraps of heroin and crack, and
selling them to make profits of £200 a day. And the BMX Mongoose had been
stolen to order by a junkie who traded bikes for drugs.

“I was still trying to do my GCSEs,” explains David, now a voluntary worker in
his 20s. But by the time he got to the school gates, he might have done ten
crack or heroin deals. And when school – in his case a pupil referral unit –
finished at 2pm, he would be out until midnight doing plenty more.

By the time he was 16, he had taken on a 15-year-old assistant.

Business was “superfast”, profits up to £600 a day: “Living the life: parties
with mad lots of alcohol, quad bikes, motorbikes, trainers, jewellery.”

And punishment beatings.

Aged 15, David dished out his first punishment beating, to a “fragile” addict
twice his age, who had tried to cheat him on a deal, “So the next time he sees
me, he knows not to do it again.”

When his 15-year-old assistant made a mistake that nearly got him arrested, “I
hit him once in the face.

“But I didn’t want to mark his face, because he was still a friend. So I
started hitting him in the chest.

“I always thought of it as just business.”

Even today, David calmly declares: “This wasn’t really violent for me. I have
grown up, seen all these stabbings, shootings. Fighting was just what you did
in the school playground.”

## Read more

  * Police warn over '100 per cent pure' cocaine on sale in UK
  * US fentanyl crisis: It's a relief to only find heroin, say police
  * The rise of heroin brings violence and fear to Mexico

It is hard not to draw parallels with the mindset of child soldiers, so
accustomed to violence that they accept it without question.

“The moral codes are a bit confused,” admits Mr Forrest, even for the adult
gangsters doing the recruiting. “At the time, you kind of convince yourself
that you are helping someone less fortunate.”

All those who spoke to _The Independent_ have since reformed. But for others,
said Hya Francis-Watson, founder of the Chayah Project, which is now helping
the Nottingham ex-teenage gangsters, “There is no hope. Education goes through
the window, your blood family goes through the window. They lose their
childhood. They get really stuck.”

The grandmother-of-ten enthuses about organising carnivals, sports, midnight
football, “anything to keep them off the streets”.

But she talks too of the need for investment in youth services, clubs, advice
centres that might catch would-be child drug dealers before it is too late.
And she concludes: “The way society is, it’s not going to change.”

Reacting to _The Independent's_ ​findings, Ann Coffey, the head of the All-
Party Parliamentary Group on Runaway and Missing Children and Adults, said:
“These figures are shocking. Young people who are groomed into drug running by
adults are being exploited in the same way as those enticed into sexual
activity. They are vulnerable and need our support.

“We mustn’t make the same mistakes again that were made in the early child
sexual exploitation scandals, where the girls were blamed for their own
exploitation and for making a ‘lifestyle choice’.

“We need to change our attitudes. We don’t yet have a system that can deal
with victims who have also become offenders.”

More about

Children | exploitation | Drugs | Class A drugs | heroin | Crack | Crack
cocaine | Cocaine | war on drugs | crime | Gangs | gangsters |

Show{{#moreThan3_total}} {{value_total}} {{/moreThan3_total}} comments

# Independent news email

Only the best news in your inbox

# Independent news email

Only the best news in your inbox

Enter your email address Continue Continue Please enter an email address Email
address is invalid Fill out this field Email address is invalid Email already
exists. Log in to update your newsletter preferences

Register with your social account or click here to log in

I **would** like to receive morning headlines Monday - Friday plus breaking
news alerts by email

Update newsletter preferences

## Comments

## Share your thoughts and debate the big issues

Learn more

{{#singleComment_p}}{{value_p}} Independent Minds
comment{{/singleComment_p}}{{^singleComment_p}}{{value_p}} Independent Minds
comments{{/singleComment_p}} {{#singleComment_open}}{{value}} open
comment{{/singleComment_open}}{{^singleComment_open}}{{value}} open
comments{{/singleComment_open}}

Open Comments

Join the discussion

##### Please be respectful when making a comment and adhere to our Community

Guidelines.

  * You may not agree with our views, or other users’, but please respond to them respectfully
  * Swearing, personal abuse, racism, sexism, homophobia and other discriminatory or inciteful language is not acceptable
  * Do not impersonate other users or reveal private information about third parties
  * We reserve the right to delete inappropriate posts and ban offending users without notification

You can find our Community Guidelines in full here.

Create a commenting name to join the debate

Submit

Please try again, the name must be unique

Post

{{#moreThanOne}}

  * Newest first
  * Oldest first
  * Most liked

{{/moreThanOne}}

Loading comments...

{{^comments}}

There are no comments yet - be the first to add your thoughts

{{/comments}} {{#comments}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

Reply {{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

{{#replies}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

Reply {{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

{{#replies}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

{{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

{{/replies}}

{{/replies}}

{{/comments}}

Loading comments...

{{^comments}}

There are no comments yet - be the first to add your thoughts

{{/comments}} {{#comments}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

Reply {{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

Create a commenting name to join the debate

Submit

Please try again, the name must be unique

Post Cancel

{{#replies}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

Reply {{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

Create a commenting name to join the debate

Submit

Please try again, the name must be unique

Post Cancel

{{#replies}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

{{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

{{/replies}}

{{/replies}}

{{/comments}}

{{#showMore}} Read more {{/showMore}}

Minds Comments

Join the discussion

##### Please be respectful when making a comment and adhere to our Community

Guidelines.

  * You may not agree with our views, or other users’, but please respond to them respectfully
  * Swearing, personal abuse, racism, sexism, homophobia and other discriminatory or inciteful language is not acceptable
  * Do not impersonate other users or reveal private information about third parties
  * We reserve the right to delete inappropriate posts and ban offending users without notification

You can find our Community Guidelines in full here.

{{^nickname}}

Create a commenting name to join the debate

Submit

Please try again, the name must be unique

{{/nickname}}

Post

{{#moreThanOne_p}}

  * Newest first
  * Oldest first
  * Most liked

{{/moreThanOne_p}}

Loading comments...

{{^comments}}

There are no _Independent Minds_ comments yet - be the first to add your
thoughts {{/comments}} {{#comments}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

Reply {{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

{{#replies}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

Reply {{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

{{#replies}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

{{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

{{/replies}}

{{/replies}}

{{/comments}}

Loading comments...

{{^comments}}

There are no _Independent Minds_ comments yet - be the first to add your
thoughts {{/comments}} {{#comments}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

Reply {{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

Create a commenting name to join the debate

Submit

Please try again, the name must be unique

Post Cancel

{{#replies}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

Reply {{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

Create a commenting name to join the debate

Submit

Please try again, the name must be unique

Post Cancel

{{#replies}}

{{sender.name}} {{dateTime}}

{{{commentText}}}

{{#sender.isSelf}} Delete {{/sender.isSelf}}

{{posVotes}} {{negVotes}}

{{/replies}}

{{/replies}}

{{/comments}}

{{#showMore_p}} Read more {{/showMore_p}}

### Follow comments

Enter your email to follow new comments on this article.

Subscribe

Thanks for subscribing!

{{errorMessage}}

### Vote

Are you sure you want to submit this vote?

Submit vote Cancel

You must be logged in to vote.

### Report Comment

Are you sure you want to mark this comment as inappropriate?

Flag comment Cancel

This comment has been flagged.

### Subscribe to _Independent Minds_ to debate the big issues

Want to discuss real-world problems, be involved in the most engaging
discussions and hear from the journalists? Try Independent Minds free for 1
month.

Try for free Already registered? Log in

### Report Comment

Are you sure you want to mark this comment as inappropriate?

Flag comment Cancel

This comment has been flagged.

### Delete Comment

Are you sure you want to delete this comment?

Delete comment Cancel

Deleting comment...

This comment has been deleted.

This comment has been deleted.

### About _The Independent_ commenting

Independent Minds Comments can be posted by members of our membership scheme,
Independent Minds. It allows our most engaged readers to debate the big
issues, share their own experiences, discuss real-world solutions, and more.
Our journalists will try to respond by joining the threads when they can to
create a true meeting of independent minds. The most insightful comments on
all subjects will be published daily in dedicated articles. You can also
choose to be emailed when someone replies to your comment.

The existing Open Comments threads will continue to exist for those who do not
subscribe to Independent Minds. Due to the sheer scale of this comment
community, we are not able to give each post the same level of attention, but
we have preserved this area in the interests of open debate. Please continue
to respect all commenters and create constructive debates.

Try for free

Already registered? Log in

##

{{shortHeadline}}

## Most popular

{{title}}

## Sponsored features

{{title}}

## Popular videos

{{title}}

### Subscribe to _Independent Minds_ to bookmark this article

Want to bookmark your favourite articles and stories to read or reference
later? Try _Independent Minds_ free for 1 month to access this feature.

Try for free

Already registered? Log in

#### Article bookmarked

Find your bookmarks in your Independent Minds section, under my profile

Don't show me this message again

  * #### Get in touch

    * Contact us
    * Jobs
    * Social/Facebook Created with Sketch. Social/Twitter Created with Sketch.
    * #### Our products

    * Subscriptions

    * Install our apps
    * Archive
    * #### Other publications

    * Evening Standard

    * Novaya Gazeta
    * #### Extras

    * All topics

    * Voucher codes
    * Advertising guide
    * Syndication
    * #### Legal

    * Code of conduct and complaints

    * Contributors
    * Cookie policy
    * Privacy notice
    * User policies

![](//trc.taboola.com/1036135/log/3/unip?en=page_view)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

