

__

![IFLScience

logo](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/iflscience_logo.png?v=1.3.5)
![IFLScience

logo](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/iflscience_logo_narrow.png?v=1.3.5)

  * ![I Love Science Store](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/ilss-logo.png?v=1.3.5)
  * __
  * __
  *     *       * __
  * ![Environment](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-environment.png?v=1.3.5) **Environment**

  * ![Technology](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-technology.png?v=1.3.5) **Technology**
  * ![Space](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-space.png?v=1.3.5) **Space**
  * ![Health and Medicine](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-health-and-medicine.png?v=1.3.5) **Health and Medicine**
  * ![The Brain](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-the-brain.png?v=1.3.5) **The Brain**
  * ![Plants and Animals](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-plants-and-animals.png?v=1.3.5) **Plants and Animals**
  * ![Physics](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-physics.png?v=1.3.5) **Physics**
  * ![Chemistry](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-chemistry.png?v=1.3.5) **Chemistry**
  * ![Policy](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-policy.png?v=1.3.5) **Policy**
  * ![Editor's Blog](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/icon-editors-blog.png?v=1.3.5) **Editor 's Blog**

# New Study Finds Marijuana Safer Than Alcohol Or Tobacco

603

__ Share **on Facebook**

__ Share **on Twitter**

__

__

__

__ Health and Medicine

![New Study Finds Marijuana Safer Than Alcohol Or

Tobacco](https://cdn.iflscience.com/assets/site/img/ifls-

placeholder.png?v=1.3.5)

Kunertus / Shutterstock

Using a novel method to measure the risk of mortality associated with the use
of various legal and illegal drugs, scientists have confirmed what earlier
studies have indicated: alcohol is the deadliest, while marijuana is the least
risky.

According to the study, at the individual level, booze presents the highest
risk of death, followed by nicotine, cocaine and heroin, suggesting the risks
of alcohol consumption have likely been underestimated in the past. Marijuana
was found to be significantly less deadly and sat at the other end of the
spectrum, in agreement with previous research which has consistently ranked it
as the safest recreational drug. While this may not be what governments want
to hear, it highlights the need to use scientific evidence whilst creating
policies regarding the use of licit and illicit drugs.

It seems that much of the world made up their mind a long time ago about the
dangers of illegal substances. This, combined with the fact that it's
difficult to assess and classify the risk of drug abuse in people, means that
few studies exist in which scientists have compared the dangers of different
drugs. Furthermore, since illegal drug abuse is regarded as a bigger problem
for society than using other known harmful substances, such as alcohol and
even various prescription drugs, governments have tended to go for restrictive
policies that are more often than not based on emotion and educated guesses.

Despite the difficulties, a few studies have attempted to assess the risks of
various drugs, such as looking at how addictive and toxic they are in terms of
acute and chronic use, but these have attracted criticism because some
judgments may have been subjective rather than scientific. In an attempt to
rectify these issues, scientists came up with a new risk assessment technique,
called the "Margin of Exposure" (MOE) method. Put simply, this looks at the
ratio between the dose which characterizes adverse effects and the amount that
people typically use. The drugs they looked at were heroin, cannabis,
nicotine, alcohol, methadone, amphetamine and MDMA.

As described in _Scientific Reports_ , they found that, at the level of
individual use, four substances were classified as high risk: alcohol,
nicotine, cocaine and heroin. The others fell into the so-called "risk"
category. However, if we look at the risks for the population rather than the
individual, only alcohol was considered high risk. According to the results,
cannabis is around 114 times less deadly than alcohol and was the only drug
out of those examined to pose a low risk of death.

That being said, the researchers hasten to point out that these results do not
mean, in any way, that drinking a moderate amount of booze is worse than
taking heroin. A lot of the harm associated with drug use is not due to the
drug itself, but rather the environment in which it is taken, for example
sharing dirty needles, and this wasn't taken into account by the study.

While this study sought to address criticisms of earlier work, and yet still
produced similar results, it's necessary to note that it still has important
limitations, some of which the authors have identified in the publication. For
example, studies examining the long-term effects of drugs are lacking, meaning
the only risk they could assess was death, rather than cancer incidence, to
name just one. Furthermore, although cannabis was deemed the least risky, the
study did not take into account the method of cannabis use. While the
components of cannabis may not pose significant health risks, smoking cannabis
poses a risk because of the inhalation of irritants. Eating it would therefore
be a safer route of exposure, but this is not addressed by the authors.

Criticisms aside, what is the take-home message? According to the authors,
time would be better spent focusing on managing the risks of alcohol and
tobacco, rather than illegal drugs. Furthermore, they suggest that for low
risk drugs like marijuana, regulation rather than prohibition would be a
better and more justified approach.

[Via Scientific Reports, Washington Post and The Verge]

Comments __

## __If you liked this story, you'll love these

### __Popular Stories

### Week in Science

#### The IFLScience Newsletter

Sign up today to get weekly science coverage direct to your inbox

  * #### Navigation

  * Home

  * Team
  * Careers
  * IFLScience Store

  * #### Contact

  * Submit News

  * Contact

  * #### Advertising

  * Advertise

  * #### Legal

  * Terms of Use

  * Privacy Policy
  * Cookie Policy

__

**This website uses cookies**

This website uses cookies to improve user experience. By continuing to use our
website you consent to all cookies in accordance with our cookie policy.

![](http://b.scorecardresearch.com/p?c1=2&c2=18981470&cv=2.0&cj=1)

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

