

![Project Know](https://www.projectknow.com/wp-

content/themes/projectknow-v3/assets/img/project-know-logo-tagline.svg) Toggle
navigation

  * Home 
  * Addiction Treatment 
  * Alcohol & Drugs 
  * Prescription Drugs 
  * Behavioral Health 
  * Substance Abuse 
  * Resources 
  * Treatment Options 
  * About AAC 
  * Search 

You don't have to be an addict forever. Get help. Call Now.

1-888-287-0471

Who Answers?

# How Much Money Is Spent on Anti-Drug Campaigns in America?

![](https://www.projectknow.com/wp-content/uploads/projectknow-

shutter54018055-netherlands-weed-in-coffee-shops.jpg)

Drugs are a serious issue, people cry. They're ruining our youth, killing our
babies, and zombifying our elders! These sort of claims are often made by
anti-drug campaigns, but are they realistic? And how much money is spent on
anti-drug messages, anyway? Is it effective?

There are so many questions that could be asked, of course, but few in power
seem to want to hear the answers when they don't conform to the rather narrow
view many of them seem to have. Take marijuana, for example. Several
presidents commissioned studies (Nixon, Reagan, and Clinton) to discover
whether marijuana was dangerous and whether it should remain banned. When the
results from each one came back saying that marijuana was generally safe but
should be handled with care (i.e., taxed appropriately to prevent serious
abuse), the presidents ignored them and carried on piling money into anti-drug
campaigns.

![No to Marijuana](//www.projectknow.com/wp-content/uploads/xprojectknow-

shutter156094049-no-to-weed.jpg.pagespeed.ic.WmcUadDZ3L.jpg)

Now that we've got that element of frustration out of the way—after all, we
don't like seeing people who don't really do very much wrong imprisoned
needlessly—we need to look at who typically finances these campaigns.

Obviously, the first big spender of anti-drug campaigns is the government. To
give you an idea of the scale of spending, $1.4 billion was spent between 1998
and 2005 on a single coordinated anti-marijuana campaign. A $43 million study,
again paid for by the federal government, stated that the campaign had been a
failure and that attitudes toward marijuana had altered—more people considered
that marijuana use was acceptable than before the campaign.

Interestingly enough, the Office of National Drug Control Policy states the
government has spent $31 billion between 2009 and 2012 on drug control; this
includes $10.1 billion on addiction recovery in 2012 alone, but it also
includes $9.4 billion on incarceration and law enforcement. However, the
figures don't quite add up.

The budget for 2013 states that the ONDCP will spend $1.3876 billion on drug
prevention, which includes the vast majority of anti-drug programs. Let's hope
they're a little more successful than the last few programs.

![money](//www.projectknow.com/wp-content/uploads/Nx210xprojectknow-

shutter232687882-money.jpg.pagespeed.ic.i8UFuMQdjW.jpg)

Nonprofits are the next group of agencies that promote the anti-drug message,
but the huge number of nonprofits devoted to anti-drug messages means it's
difficult to estimate how much money is spent on them. In addition, quite a
large number are financed by the government, so it's hard to keep track of it
all. A reasonable estimate might be around $200 million per year, much sourced
from donations and government funds.

Nonprofits tend to push an even narrower view than government agencies. While
this is useful in crack-addled neighborhoods in Detroit, this is not so useful
to those who have money and enjoy a line of coke with their cigars.

The issue with anti-drug programs is that they bring drugs to a wider
audience. They also normalize drugs, in that they promote the idea that many
people are doing drugs. They also promote the effects of the drug. If they
don't, people see the adverts as being farcical and unrealistic. This creates
a feeling of mistrust and sometimes even a willingness to try out the drug
that hadn't been present before.

The best rehab programs are ones that encourage a healthy dialog along with an
acceptance that some people will always experiment. They don't overstate the
dangers of various drugs, and they also involve parents and so on. This works
very well in Holland, where the laid-back attitude is legendary, but they also
have some of the lowest Schedule I abuse rates in the Western world.

In short, it's not the kids, teens, and twenty-somethings who need to be
educated. Education should begin at home in a knowledgeable and loving
atmosphere. In addition, the huge amount of spending on anti-drug advertising
would be much better off spent on addiction programs for those incarcerated on
nonviolent drug charges.

We don't like watching people suffer needlessly, and drug awareness programs
in their current guises consistently miss the plot. The money would be much
better off sorting out the core issues of drug addiction: the increasing
isolation of Americans, the fear and mystery around drugs, and the complete
inconsistency of the supply.

It's interesting to see that the government still wants to lock people up
rather than help them get better from what the White House's own website calls
a disease. Drug addiction and detox treatment should be for everyone, not just
the rich.

### Feel differently? read the related view at our Big Pharma: Are They

Advertising Addiction? post.

Topics

  * Mainpage 
  * addiction 
  * Aftercare 
  * Alcohol 
  * Assessments 
  * Barbiturate Addiction 
  * Behavioral Addictions 
  * Behavioral Health 
  * Benzodiazepine 
  * Buprenorphine 
  * Co-occurring Disorders 
  * cocaine 
  * Crack Cocaine 
  * Crystal Meth 
  * Designer Drugs 
  * Detox Withdrawal 
  * Detoxing 
  * Drugs 
  * Eating disorder 
  * Ecstasy and Mdma 
  * Famous People 
  * Guest Blog Post 
  * Hash 
  * Heroin 
  * How to help 
  * Inhalant 
  * ketamine 
  * Legal 
  * Lsd 
  * Marijuana 
  * Mixing Drugs 
  * Morphine 
  * Mushrooms 
  * opiate 
  * Opium 
  * Parents Guide 
  * Porn Addiction 
  * Prescription Addiction 
  * Prescription Drugs 
  * Process Addictions 
  * Rehab 
  * Schools and Education 
  * Sex Addiction 
  * Shocking 
  * Society 
  * Teen and Adolescent 
  * The Brain 
  * The Media 

Top Posts in Drugs

  * 15 Famous Heroin Addicts and Why They Used 
  * 5 Tips for Getting Addicted Teenagers into Rehab 
  * Can I Die Trying to Detox from Alcohol or Drugs? 
  * 15 Famous Cocaine Addicts and Why They Used 
  * A Complete Guide to the US Presidents and Their Drug and Alcohol Use 

ProjectKnow.com is operated by Recovery Brands LLC, a subsidiary of American
Addiction Centers, Inc. Learn more about what this means here

Call Today

1-888-287-0471 Who Answers?

Commonly Abused Drugs

  * Alcohol 
  * Cocaine 
  * Crack Cocaine 
  * Crystal Meth 
  * Ecstasy & MDMA 
  * Heroin 
  * Marijuana 
  * New and Designer Drugs 

Behavioral Disorders

  * Eating Disorders 
  * Gambling Addiction 
  * Internet Addiction 
  * Video Game Addiction 

Prescription Drug Abuse

  * Prescription Drugs by Type 
  * Amphetamine 
  * Buprenorphine 
  * Clonazepam 
  * Codeine 
  * Diazepam 
  * Fentanyl 
  * Hydrocodone 
  * Lorazepam 
  * Methadone 
  * Methamphetamine 
  * Morphine 
  * Oxycodone 
  * Tramadol 
  * Zolpidem 

Substance Abuse Help

  * Do I Drink Too Much? 
  * Am I Addicted to Drugs? 
  * How to Help an Addict or Alcoholic 

Recent Articles

  * Violence Prevention 
  * Behavioral Health Hotlines 
  * Alcohol and Drug Rehab Hotlines 

ProjectKnow.com Blog

Statistics

Struggling with Addiction?

Contact us today and let us get you on the right track.

You're Not Alone. Call Today

1-888-287-0471

Get in Touch Right Now Who Answers?

GENERAL DISCLAIMER: Projectknow.com is designed for educational purposes only
and is not engaged in rendering medical advice. The information provided
through Projectknow.com should not be used for diagnosing or treating a health
problem or disease. It is not a substitute for professional care. If you have
or suspect you may have a health problem, you should consult your health care
provider. The authors, editors, producers, and contributors shall have no
liability, obligation, or responsibility to any person or entity for any loss,
damage, or adverse consequences alleged to have happened directly or
indirectly as a consequence of material on this website. If you believe you
have a medical emergency, you should immediately call 911.

  * Home 
  * Addiction Treatment 
  * Alcohol & Drugs 
  * Prescription Drugs 
  * Behavioral Health 
  * Substance Abuse Help 
  * Resources 
  * Treatment Options 
  * About AAC 

  * ProjectKnow.com is operated by Recovery Brands LLC, a subsidiary of American Addiction Centers, Inc. 

  * Privacy Policy 
  * Terms of Use 
  * © Project Know 2019. All Rights Reserved. 

## How Our Helpline Works

For those seeking addiction treatment for themselves or a loved one, the
ProjectKnow.com helpline is a private and convenient solution.

**Calls to any general helpline (non-facility specific 1-8XX numbers) for your
visit will be answered by American Addiction Centers (AAC).**

We are standing by 24/7 to discuss your treatment options. Our representatives
work solely for AAC and will discuss whether an AAC facility may be an option
for you.

Our helpline is offered at no cost to you and with no obligation to enter into
treatment. Neither ProjectKnow.com nor AAC receives any commission or other
fee that is dependent upon which treatment provider a visitor may ultimately
choose.

For more information on AAC’s commitment to ethical marketing and treatment
practices, or to learn more about how to select a treatment provider, visit
our About AAC page.

If you wish to explore additional treatment options or connect with a specific
rehab center, you can visit SAMHSA.gov.

_[ v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this
template_ [v]: View this template _[AU]: Australia_ [CA]: Canada _[UK]: United
Kingdom_ [US]: United States _[UN]: United Nations_ [EU]: European Union
_[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[
ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[ v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[v]: View this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

