

Skip directly to site content Skip directly to page options Skip directly to
A-Z link

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC twenty four seven. Saving
Lives, Protecting People Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC
twenty four seven. Saving Lives, Protecting People

Search ____

×

Submit __

For a full list of topics: A-Z Index

Motor Vehicle Safety

Section Navigation

TP Docs Home

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Email
  * Syndicate

# Impaired Driving: Get the Facts

Español (Spanish)

Minus

Related Pages

Every day, 29 people in the United States die in motor vehicle crashes that
involve an alcohol-impaired driver.1 This is one death every 50 minutes.1 The
annual cost of alcohol-related crashes totals more than $44 billion.2

Thankfully, there are effective measures that can help prevent injuries and
deaths from alcohol-impaired driving.

  * The Problem
  * Risk Factors
  * BAC Effects
  * Prevention
  * Additional Resources

## How big is the problem?

  * In 2016, 10,497 people died in alcohol-impaired driving crashes, accounting for 28% of all traffic-related deaths in the United States.1
  * Of the 1,233 traffic deaths among children ages 0 to 14 years in 2016, 214 (17%) involved an alcohol-impaired driver.1
  * In 2016, more than 1 million drivers were arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol or narcotics.3 That's one percent of the 111 million self-reported episodes of alcohol-impaired driving among U.S. adults each year (figure below).
  * Drugs other than alcohol (legal and illegal) are involved in about 16% of motor vehicle crashes.4
  * Marijuana use is increasing and 13% of nighttime, weekend drivers have marijuana in their system.5
  * Marijuana users were about 25% more likely to be involved in a crash than drivers with no evidence of marijuana use, however other factors-such as age and gender-may account for the increased crash risk among marijuana users.4

### Annual Self-reported Alcohol-impaired Driving Episodes among U.S. Adults,

1993-2014

![Annual episodes in millions:

1993-123,1995-115,1997-116,1999-159,2002-159,2004-124,2006-161,2008-131,2010-112,2012-121,2014-111](/motorvehiclesafety/images/impaired_driving/yearly_aid.png)

**Source:** CDC. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), 1993
-2014. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/brfss  
**Note:** The annual estimated alcohol-impaired driving episodes were
calculated using BRFSS respondents' answers to this question: "During the past
30 days, how many times have you driven when you've had perhaps too much to
drink?" Annual estimates per respondent were calculated by multiplying the
reported episodes during the preceding 30 days by 12. These numbers were
summed to obtain the annual national estimates (see
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6430a2.htm).

## Who is most at risk?

**Young people:**

  * At all levels of blood alcohol concentration (BAC), the risk of being involved in a crash is greater for young people than for older people.6
  * Among drivers with BAC levels of 0.08% or higher involved in fatal crashes in 2016, nearly three in 10 were between 25 and 34 years of age (27%). The next two largest groups were ages 21 to 24 (26%) and 35 to 44 (22%).1

**Motorcyclists:**

  * Among motorcyclists killed in fatal crashes in 2016, 25% had BACs of 0.08% or greater.1
  * Motorcyclists ages 35-39 have the highest percentage of deaths with BACs of 0.08% or greater (38% in 2016).7

**Drivers with prior driving while impaired (DWI) convictions:**

  * Drivers with a BAC of 0.08% or higher involved in fatal crashes were 4.5 times more likely to have a prior conviction for DWI than were drivers with no alcohol in their system. (9% and 2%, respectively).1

## What are the effects of blood alcohol concentration (BAC)?

Information in this table shows the blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level at
which the effect usually is first observed.

Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) _| Typical Effects | Predictable Effects on
Driving  
\---|---|---  
.02%  
About 2 alcoholic drinks_ * |

  * Some loss of judgment
  * Relaxation
  * Slight body warmth
  * Altered mood

|

  * Decline in visual functions (rapid tracking of a moving target)
  * Decline in ability to perform two tasks at the same time (divided attention)

.05%  
About 3 alcoholic drinks** |

  * Exaggerated behavior
  * May have loss of small-muscle control (e.g., focusing your eyes)
  * Impaired judgment
  * Usually good feeling
  * Lowered alertness
  * Release of inhibition

|

  * Reduced coordination
  * Reduced ability to track moving objects
  * Difficulty steering
  * Reduced response to emergency driving situations

.08%  
About 4 alcoholic drinks** |

  * Muscle coordination becomes poor (e.g., balance, speech, vision, reaction time, and hearing)
  * Harder to detect danger
  * Judgment, self-control, reasoning, and memory are impaired

|

  * Concentration
  * Short-term memory loss
  * Speed control
  * Reduced information processing capability (e.g., signal detection, visual search)
  * Impaired perception

.10%  
About 5 alcoholic drinks** |

  * Clear deterioration of reaction time and control
  * Slurred speech, poor coordination, and slowed thinking

|

  * Reduced ability to maintain lane position and brake appropriately

.15%  
About 7 alcoholic drinks** |

  * Far less muscle control than normal
  * Vomiting may occur (unless this level is reached slowly or a person has developed a tolerance  
for alcohol)

  * Major loss of balance

|

  * Substantial impairment in vehicle control, attention to driving task, and in necessary visual and auditory information processing

###### *Blood Alcohol Concentration Measurement

The number of drinks listed represents the approximate amount of alcohol that
a 160-pound man would need to drink in one hour to reach the listed BAC in
each category.

###### **A Standard Drink Size in the United States

A standard drink is equal to 14.0 grams (0.6 ounces) of pure alcohol.
Generally, this amount of pure alcohol is found in

  * 12-ounces of beer (5% alcohol content)
  * 8-ounces of malt liquor (7% alcohol content)
  * 5-ounces of wine (12% alcohol content)
  * 1.5-ounces or a "shot" of 80-proof (40% alcohol content) distilled spirits or liquor (e.g., gin, rum, vodka, whiskey)

Adapted from The ABCs of BACCdc-pdfExternal, National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, 2005, and How to Control Your Drinking, WR Miller and RF
Munoz, University of New Mexico, 1982.

## **How can deaths and injuries from impaired driving be prevented?**

Effective measures include:

  * Actively enforcing existing 0.08% BAC laws, minimum legal drinking age laws, and zero tolerance laws for drivers younger than 21 years old in all states.4,8
  * Requiring ignition interlocks for all offenders, including first-time offenders.9
  * Using sobriety checkpoints.10
  * Putting health promotion efforts into practice that influence economic, organizational, policy, and school/community action.11,12
  * Using community-based approaches to alcohol control and DWI prevention.8,12,13
  * Requiring mandatory substance abuse assessment and treatment, if needed, for DWI offenders.14
  * Raising the unit price of alcohol by increasing taxes.15

## **What safety steps can individuals take?**

Whenever your social plans involve alcohol and/or drugs, make plans so that
you don't have to drive while impaired. For example:

  * Before drinking, designate a non-drinking driver when with a group.
  * Don't let your friends drive impaired.
  * If you have been drinking or using drugs, get a ride home, use a rideshare service or call a taxi.
  * If you're hosting a party where alcohol will be served, remind your guests to plan ahead and designate their sober driver; offer alcohol-free beverages, and make sure all guests leave with a sober driver.

Related Pages

  * Marijuana and Public Health
  * Sobering Facts: Drunk Driving State Fact Sheets
  * What Works: Strategies to Reduce or Prevent Drunk Driving
  * Increasing Alcohol Ignition Interlock Use
  * State-Based Motor Vehicle Data & Information
  * CDC Vital Signs: Teen Drinking and Driving - A Dangerous Mix (October 2012)
  * BRFSS AID Report: Alcohol-Impaired Driving Among Adults-- United States, 2012 (August 2015)

Additional Data

  * Drunk Driving State Data and Maps
  * Motor Vehicle Prioritizing Interventions and Cost Calculator for States (MV PICCS)  
CDC offers an interactive calculator to help state decision makers prioritize
and select from a suite of 14 effective motor vehicle injury prevention
interventions. MV PICCS is designed to calculate the expected number of
injuries prevented and lives saved at the state level and the costs of
implementation, while taking into account available resources.

  * data.cdc.gov  
View and download dozens of motor vehicle datasets and visualizations,
including charts and maps, on data.cdc.gov.

#### References

  1. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Traffic Safety Facts 2016 data: alcohol-impaired driving. U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC; 2017 Available at: https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/812450External Accessed 16 April 2018.
  2. Blincoe LJ, Miller TR, Zaloshnja E, Lawrence BA. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The economic and societal impact of motor vehicle crashes, 2010. (Revised). U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC; 2015. Available at: http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/pubs/812013.pdfCdc-pdfExternal. Accessed 16 April 2018.
  3. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Department of Justice (US). Crime in the United States 2016: Uniform Crime Reports. Washington (DC): FBI; 2017. Available at https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2016/crime-in-the-u.s.-2016/tables/table-18External. Accessed 16 April 2018.
  4. Compton RP, Berning A. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Traffic Safety Facts Research Note: drugs and alcohol crash risk. U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC; 2015 Available at: http://www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/nti/pdf/812117-Drug_and_Alcohol_Crash_Risk.pdfCdc-pdfExternal. Accessed 16 April 2018.
  5. Berning A, Compton R, Wochinger K. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Results of the 2013-2014 national roadside survey of alcohol and drug use by drivers. U.S. Department of Transportation. Washington, DC; 2015. Available at: https://www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.dot.gov/files/812118-roadside_survey_2014.pdfCdc-pdfExternal. Accessed 16 April 2018.
  6. Zador PL, Krawchuk SA, Voas RB. Alcohol-related relative risk of driver fatalities and driver involvement in fatal crashes in relation to driver age and gender: an update using 1996 data. _Journal of Studies on Alcohol_ 2000; 61:387-395.
  7. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Traffic Safety Facts 2016 data: motorcycles. U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC; 2018. Available at: https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/812492External. Accessed 16 April 2018.
  8. The Community Guide. Motor vehicle-related injury prevention: reducing alcohol-impaired driving. Available at: http://www.thecommunityguide.org/mvoi/AID/index.htmlExternal. Accessed 16 April 2018.
  9. The Community Guide. Reducing alcohol-impaired driving: ignition interlocks. Available at: http://www.thecommunityguide.org/mvoi/AID/ignitioninterlocks.htmlExternal. Accessed 16 April 2018.
  10. The Community Guide. Reducing alcohol-impaired driving: publicized sobriety checkpoint programs. Available at: http://www.thecommunityguide.org/mvoi/AID/sobrietyckpts.htmlExternal. Accessed 16 April 2018.
  11. Gielen AC, Sleet DA, DiClemente RJ. Modifying alcohol use to reduce motor vehicle injury. Injury and violence prevention: behavior science theories, methods, and applications. San Francisco, CA: _Jossey-Bass_ , 2006 pp 534. ISBN 978- 7879-7764-1
  12. Holder HD, Gruenewald PJ, Ponicki WR, et al. Effect of community-based interventions on high-risk drinking and alcohol-related injuries. _JAMA_ 2000;284:2341-7.
  13. Shults RA, Elder RW, Nichols J, et al. Effectiveness of multicomponent programs with community mobilization for reducing alcohol-impaired driving. _American Journal of Preventative Medicine, _009;37(4):360-371.
  14. Higgins-Biddle J, Dilonardo J. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Alcohol and highway safety: screening and brief intervention for alcohol problems as a community approach to improving traffic safety. U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, DC; 2013 DOT HS 811 836.
  15. The Community Guide. Reducing excessive alcohol use: increasing alcohol taxes. Available at URL: http://www.thecommunityguide.org/alcohol/increasingtaxes.htmlExternal. Accessed 16 April 2018.

* * *

![CDC Vital Signs: Motor Vehicle Crash Deaths. In 2013, the US crash death

rate was more than twice the average of other high-income countries.

www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/motor-vehicle-

safety](/motorvehiclesafety/images/campaign/MVS-campaign-banner.jpg)

Page last reviewed: March 22, 2019, 12:00 AM

Content source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center
for Injury Prevention and Control

home Motor Vehicle Safety

  * State Data and Information expand
    * State Data Linkage Systems
    * Motor Vehicle Occupant Death Rates by State
    * Motor Vehicle Occupant Deaths in States, 2003-2012
  * Cost Data and Prevention Policies expand
    * Motor Vehicle Prioritizing Interventions and Cost Calculator for States (MV PICCS) expand
    * Intervention Fact Sheets
    * Intervention Glossary
    * Costs of Crash Deaths
  * Child Passenger Safety expand
    * Get the Facts
    * What Works: Strategies to Increase Car Seat and Booster Seat Use
    * Publications
    * Resources
  * Seat Belts expand
    * Get the Facts
    * State Fact Sheets
    * What Works: Strategies to Increase Restraint Use
    * State Data
    * Seat Belt Use US Map
    * Publications
    * Policy Impact
  * Teen Drivers expand
    * Get the Facts
    * GDL Planning Guide
    * Policy Impact
    * Publications
    * Parents Are the Key
  * Older Adult Drivers expand
    * MyMobility Plan expand
    * Resources
    * Spanish Resources
    * Social Media
    * Related Pages
    * Medicine Risk Fact Sheet
  * Impaired Driving expand
    * Get the Facts
    * State Fact Sheets
    * What Works: Strategies to Reduce or Prevent Drunk Driving
    * Increasing Alcohol Ignition Interlock Use
    * State Data & Maps
    * Publications
  * Distracted Driving
  * Pedestrian Safety expand
    * Publications
  * Tribal Road Safety expand
    * Get the Facts
    * Roadway to Safer Tribal Communities Toolkit expand
    * Government and Health Professionals
    * Seat Belts
    * Child Safety
    * Drinking and Driving
    * Tribal Resources
    * Best Practices Guide
    * Publications
  * Motorcycle Safety
  * Bicycle Safety expand
    * Publications
  * Global Road Safety

Email_03 Get Email Updates

To receive email updates about this topic, enter your email address:

Email Address

What's this?

Submit

More CDC Alcohol Topics

  * CDC Alcohol Portal
  * Excessive Alcohol Use
  * Binge Drinking
  * Underage Drinking
  * Alcohol & Pregnancy

**CONTACT CDC-INFO**

Have questions? We have answers. 1-800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) TTY:
888-232-6348

Email CDC-INFO

**CDC INFORMATION**

  * About CDC
  * Jobs
  * Funding
  * Policies
  * File Viewers & Players

  * Privacy

  * FOIA
  * No Fear Act
  * OIG
  * Nondiscrimination
  * Accessibility

**CONNECT WITH CDC**

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Youtube
  * Instagram

  * Syndicate

  * CDC TV
  * RSS
  * Email

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services

USA.gov

CDC Website Exit Disclaimer external icon

  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * Email

![Web Analytics](https://cdc.112.2o7.net/b/ss/cdcgov/1/H.21--NS/01/H.21--NS/0)

PDF file_external

#### Exit Notification/Disclaimer Policy

Close

**Links with this icon indicate that you are leaving the CDC website.**

  * The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) cannot attest to the accuracy of a non-federal website.
  * Linking to a non-federal website does not constitute an endorsement by CDC or any of its employees of the sponsors or the information and products presented on the website.
  * You will be subject to the destination website's privacy policy when you follow the link.
  * CDC is not responsible for Section 508 compliance (accessibility) on other federal or private website.

For more information on CDC's web notification policies, see Website
Disclaimers.

Cancel Continue

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

