

Skip to main content

![Home](/themes/custom/drugpolicy/logo.png)

## Quick Links

  * Blog.
  * For Media.
  * Facebook
  * Twitter
  * YouTube

## Main navigation

  * Issues.
    * About the Drug War.
    * History of the Drug War
    * Drug War Statistics
    * Making Economic Sense
    * New Solutions for Drug Policy
    * The International Drug War
    * Reforming Marijuana Laws.
    * Legalization & Regulation
    * Medical Marijuana
    * Criminal Justice Reform.
    * Drug Decriminalization
    * Mass Criminalization
    * Race & the Drug War
    * Women & the Drug War
    * LGBTQIA+ People & the Drug War
    * Asset Forfeiture Reform
    * Harm Reduction.
    * Discrimination
    * Overdose
    * Naloxone
    * Good Samaritan Laws
    * Supervised Consumption Services
    * Syringe Access
    * Drug Checking
    * Protecting Youth.
    * Families
    * Drug Education
    * Student Aid
    * Safer Partying
  * Drug Facts.
    * Marijuana
    * Heroin
    * MDMA (Ecstasy, Molly)
    * Cocaine
    * Methamphetamine
    * LSD
    * Psilocybin Mushrooms
    * Synthetic Opioids (Fentanyl)
    * Synthetic Cannabinoids (Spice, K2)
    * Synthetic Cathinones (Bath Salts, Flakka)
  * Take Action.
    * Action Alerts
    * Become a Member
    * Attend an Event
    * Contact Your Elected Officials
    * Key States
    * Shop to Support DPA
    * Ways to Give
  * Resources.
    * Browse Resources
    * Drug Education Resources
    * Resources for Academics
    * Online Resource Library
    * Recommended Books
    * Treatment, Counseling & Legal Help
  * About Us.
    * Vision & Mission
    * History of DPA
    * Our Victories
    * Staff & Board
    * Departments & State Offices
    * Jobs & Internships
    * Advocacy Grants from DPA
    * International Drug Policy Reform Conference
    * Membership
    * Annual Report
    * Member Newsletter
    * Financial Documents

Search

_Search this site_ _Close search panel_

Donate _⁠⁠ _

__

# Making Economic Sense

The drug war is responsible for trillions of wasted tax dollars and
misallocated government spending, as well as devastating human costs that far
outweigh the damage caused by drugs alone. The United States’ unrivaled
incarceration rate is a constant financial drain, causing an immeasurable loss
in workforce productivity, and puts a strain on scant legal and law
enforcement resources.

DPA is working to end wasteful government spending on the drug war by leading
the national dialogue about ending prohibition and refocusing resources on
health-centered approaches to drug use.

## Key Economic Issues

**Wasted Tax Dollars**

Over the past four decades, federal and state governments have poured over $1
trillion the drug war and relied on taxpayers to foot the bill. Unfortunately,
these tax dollars haven’t solved the problems they were intended to solve –
while creating a whole new set of huge problems.

Here are some of the fiscal costs of the war on drugs:

  * In 1980, the United States had 50,000 people behind bars for drug law violations – now we have half a million.
  * More than one million people are arrested simply for drug possession in the U.S. every year – that’s one arrest every 25 seconds.
  * Money funneled into drug enforcement has meant less funding to improve public safety and has left essential education, health, social service and public safety programs struggling to operate on meager funding.
  * Drug war advocates continue to demand more money for the same failed policies despite the fact that highly-funded law enforcement and interdiction strategies have failed to reduce drug use and drug availability. They want to keep wasting your tax dollars and destroying countless lives on a losing battle.
  * The demand for drugs in the United States has remained constant despite the United States’ enormous financial commitment to fighting the war on drugs with well-equipped drug taskforces and the full force of mass incarceration.
  * The drug war has created enormous public health costs by limiting the availability of harm reduction programs that could quell overdose and infectious disease transmission rates.

Just as disheartening as the fiscal costs of fighting a failed drug war are
the opportunity costs. Think of the impact all that drug war funding could
have if instead of financing the arrest and incarceration of millions of
people each year, we made drug treatment more widely available, improved
social service and education programs, or simply gave the money back to
taxpayers.

**Distorted Incentives for Law Enforcement**

Ever wonder why police spend so much time enforcing failed drug laws? To find
the answer, you just need to follow the money.

  * **Funding schemes** – Because funding for law enforcement is often based on the number of arrests made and the amount of property seized, the easiest way for local police to up their numbers and boost their careers is to target low-level drug offenders. To create arrest opportunities, police routinely rely on untrustworthy informants, conduct dangerous home invasions on flimsy evidence, frame suspects, and commit perjury.
  * **Asset forfeiture laws** – These laws allow law enforcement agencies to keep the property they seize during drug arrests with minimal proof, putting the burden instead on suspects to prove their own innocence. As a result, local law enforcement agencies tend to increase their focus on drug arrests, often at the expense of more pressing public safety needs.
  * **The Byrne Justice Assistance Grant program** – This program provides federal funding to hundreds of regional anti-drug taskforces. These taskforces are at the center of numerous scandals involving falsified government records, witness tampering, fabricated evidence, false imprisonment, stolen property, large-scale racial profiling and sexual abuse.

**Supply and Demand**

A prime example of the drug war’s backward logic is its distortion of the
basic economic principle of supply and demand. The federal government funnels
vast resources into futile criminal justice and interdiction policies intended
to reduce the supply of drugs, while neglecting treatment and education
strategies that could help reduce drug demand.

This focus on supply reduction has failed to reduce drug use, while provoking
drug trade-related violence. The economic incentives of the illegal drug trade
ensure that supply-side interdiction is an unwinnable battle. Education and
treatment programs are exponentially more cost-effective and successful when
it comes to addressing problematic substance use.

Internationally, the hypocrisy of American drug policy is clear. Despite being
the largest consumer of drugs in the world, the U.S. focuses on violent supply
reduction strategies in other countries while investing little in demand
reduction strategies domestically.

Drug prohibition essentially provides a monopoly and price supports for
organized crime. Forcibly limiting the supply of drugs while demand remains
relatively constant only increases the profitability of drug trafficking.

**Drug Prohibition and Violence**

Drug enforcement officials often cite drug-related violence as a reason that
drugs must be eliminated from our society, but it is actually the system of
drug prohibition that causes much of the violence. Just as alcohol Prohibition
fostered organized crime in the 1920s, drug prohibition empowers a dangerous
illegal market throughout the United States and the world.

Prohibition has inflated the price, and thus the profit, of drugs
substantially. It has also driven the drug trade underground, where there are
no legal avenues for peacefully resolving disputes between competitors.

Rather than proposing specific policies for increasing prevention and
treatment services to directly impact drug use in the United States, the
federal government's approach to the alarming prohibition-related violence in
countries like Mexico and Colombia has been to pour more money into law
enforcement crackdowns on cartels and efforts to intercept drug shipments.
Throughout the drug war's history, these kinds of supply-side interventions
have consistently failed to reduce violence. They have instead made the
illicit drug market more profitable, more competitive and more dangerous.

In countries that bear the brunt of drug war violence, such as Mexico, Bolivia
and Colombia, prominent leaders are speaking up more and more about the
benefits of ending prohibition. We believe ending drug prohibition is the key
to reducing drug war violence in the U.S. and restoring peace to destabilized
regions abroad.

## Our Priorities

The Drug Policy Alliance is working to shift funding away from the same old
failed policies and toward effective drug treatment and education programs. We
are leading the movement to end prohibition’s drain on our economy and to
protect your tax dollars from wasteful drug war spending.

We advocate for ending prohibition and treating drug use as a health issue,
not a criminal justice issue. As a nation, we must learn to live with the
reality of drugs and drug use and find solutions based on common sense and
sound economic principles.

Here are some examples of our work:

  * DPA has joined with other civil rights and criminal justice reform groups to demand an overhaul of the Byrne Justice Assistance Grant program that would put an end to financial incentives that that are notorious for wasting taxpayer dollars and fostering corruption.
  * DPA is the leading voice calling for the Office of National Drug Control Policy to cut funding for enforcement and devote more resources to treatment and other health approaches to drug use.
  * DPA is developing public health alternatives to prohibition, including increased treatment availability and better drug education, that would help reduce the demand for drugs and minimize the influence of violent cartels.

Wasteful Spending

## Featured Resources

The Scandal-Ridden DEA: Everything You Need to Know (English/Spanish)

Above the Law: An Investigation of Civil Asset Forfeiture in California

The Federal Drug Control Budget

More Resources

## Related News

Press Release

####

12.12.18

Revised Criminal Justice Reform Bill to Be Reintroduced in the Senate Today

Press Release

####

07.19.17

Kamala Harris and Rand Paul Spearhead Senate Bail Reform Effort

Press Release

####

07.09.17

New Drug Policy Alliance Report: It's Time for the U.S. to Decriminalize Drug
Use and Possession

More News

## Take Action

It's Time to Fire the DEA

### The DEA has fueled mass incarceration, wasted taxpayer money, and blocked

scientific research. Tell President Trump to reform or eliminate the DEA!

Send Your Message

## Get Updates

Sign up to receive action alerts and news about drug policy reform.

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/press-resources.png)

Press Resources.

Get tips for covering the war on drugs and download DPA staff photos, logos,
marijuana stock photos and b-roll video.

See Resources

![Man at No More Drug War rally](/sites/default/files/2019-06/2018-annual-

report-footer2.jpg)

Annual Report.

The Drug Policy Alliance is entering a critical chapter in its history. ****
We have the momentum to end the drug war. Will you stand with us?

View Report

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/store.png)

Wear Your Support.

Show off your support for drug policy reform with our new Party Safer t-shirts
and tank tops.

Shop Now

![](/sites/default/files/2017-09/give-now-2.png)

Give Now.

### Together, we are fighting for responsible drug policy. Join us.

Give Now.

## Footer menu

  * News.
  * Jobs.
  * Store.
  * Contact Us.

![Drug Policy Alliance

Logo](../sites/default/files/We_are_DPAlliance_96_0.png)

**Drug Policy Alliance Headquarters**

131 West 33rd Street, 15th Floor

New York, New York 10001

**P.** 212.613.8020

  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠ _
  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠ ⁠_
  * _⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠ _

  * Privacy Policy.

  * Terms of Use.
  * © Copyright 2019 Drug Policy Alliance. All Rights Reserved.

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

