

lifestyle health-fitness

  * News 

  * LifeStyle

  * Autos

RU BR AU FR DE UK CA US

  * Autos
  * LifeStyle
  * News 

  *   *     *       *         *           *             *               *                 *   *   *     *       *         *           *             *               *   *   *     *       *         *           *             *               *                 *                   * 

![PressFrom - US Logo](/img/logo-pressfrom-1.png)

  * Style

  * Home & Garden

  * Smart Living

  * Family & Relationships

  * Health & Fit

  * Food

  * Travel

# _Health & Fit_ Fatal accidents involving drugs surpasses alcohol-related

crashes: report

21:21 01 june 2018

21:21 01 june 2018 Source: foxnews.com

## ![](/upload/images/small/2018/05/09/getting-cocaine-delivered-is-faster-

than-a-pizza__166889_.jpg) Getting Cocaine Delivered Is Faster Than A Pizza

![  Getting Cocaine Delivered Is Faster Than A Pizza

](/upload/images/real/2018/05/09/getting-cocaine-delivered-is-faster-than-a-

pizza__166889_.jpg) 30.3 percent of 15,000 surveyed around the world said they
could get drugs delivered within half an hour. Cocaine can be delivered faster
than takeout pizza in England and Scotland, according to a recent global drug
survey.More than one third of cocaine users of the 1,000 that were surveyed in
England and 500 in Scotland said they were able to get the illegal substance
delivered within half an hour. A figure that places the two countries at fifth
and sixth place on the global world ranking.

> drugs surpasses alcohol -associated crashes : report Fatal accidents
involving drugs surpasses alcohol -associated crashes : report A nbsp(AP) A
new report published Thursday discovered that fatal vehicle crashes involving
marijuana, opioids and drug use have improved over the past.

>

> Traffic crashes were the leading cause of alcohol - related deaths and two-
thirds of traffic deaths among persons aged 16 to 20 involved alcohol. At that
time, preventive measures consisted primarily of efforts to reduce harm from
alcohol by identifying and treating middle-aged individuals convicted of

![A report found there was an increase in fatal accidents involving marijuana

and opioids in the past decade.](/upload/images/real/2018/06/01/a-report-

found-there-was-an-increase-in-fatal-accidents-involving-marijuana-and-

opioids-in-the-past-_444687_.jpg?content=1) © Provided by Fox News A report
found there was an increase in fatal accidents involving marijuana and opioids
in the past decade.

A new report published Thursday found that fatal car crashes involving
marijuana, opioids and drug use have increased over the past decade and
surpassed incidents related to alcohol.

The study by the Governor’s Highway Safety Association stated alcohol was
involved in 38 percent of fatal accidents in 2016. Meanwhile, 44 percent of
“fatally-injured drivers” tested positive for drugs, a statistic up 28 percent
from 2006.

The report found that 38 percent of the drivers killed tested positive for
marijuana, 16 percent were positive for opioids and 4 percent had a
combination of both.

## ![](/upload/images/small/2018/05/11/alcohol-tobacco-are-biggest-threats-to-

human-welfare-report-finds__738644_.jpg) Alcohol, Tobacco Are Biggest Threats
To Human Welfare, Report Finds

![  Alcohol, Tobacco Are Biggest Threats To Human Welfare, Report Finds

](/upload/images/real/2018/05/11/alcohol-tobacco-are-biggest-threats-to-human-

welfare-report-finds__738644_.jpg) Despite the rise of drug epidemics, a new
report found alcohol and tobacco continued to pose a bigger threat to human
welfare across the globe. Alcohol, tobacco, and illicit drugs: Of these three
options, which would you consider to be the greatest threat to human welfare?
Surprisingly, illicit drug use is the wrong answer, according to a new report
which combined data from the World Health Organization, United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, and the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation.

> To reduce alcohol - related fatal crashes among youth, all States have
adopted a minimum legal drinking Also see Drug -Impaired Driving. Driving a
vehicle while impaired is a dangerous crime. Our programs have consistently
reduced alcohol - related crash fatalities . We will continue until there

>

> The U.S. government does not track death rates for every drug . However, the
National Center for Health Statistics at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention does collect information The CDC also has a searchable database,
called CDC Wonder. The CDC's reporting on deaths by overdose.

“We definitely see states liberalizing marijuana laws. There are more
prescriptions of drugs than ever before and we are in the midst of an opioid
crisis,” Russ Martin, the director of government relations for the Governor’s
Highway Safety Association, said.

Experts told CBS Philly it was difficult to determine and test if a driver was
under the influence of drugs.

“Right now, we don’t have a nationally agreed upon way to test drivers for
drug impairment similar to a breathalyzer or blood test for alcohol,” Martin
said.

Officers were being trained on how to determine better if a driver could be
under the influence of drugs to decrease the number of deaths.

US Deaths From Drug Overdose, Suicide Surpass Diabetes .  
Experts believe that by categorizing both suicide and substance-related
poisonings under deaths by self-injury, patients can benefit from combined and
coordinated efforts of prevention. Self-injury mortality has surpassed
diabetes as the seventh leading cause of death in the United States, according
to a new report. Deaths in this category are caused by drug or alcohol
intoxication as well as all methods of suicide.
require(["medianetNativeAdOnArticle"], function (medianetNativeAdOnArticle) {
medianetNativeAdOnArticle.

\-- Share news in the SOC. Networks

## Topical videos:

### Drugged driving deaths surpass drunken driving fatalities

With the rise of anopioidepidemic and the legalization of marijuana in a
growing number of states, incidents of drugged driving have been increasing.
News 3's ...

### Steve Wilkos in DUI, lied about the cause of his car incident

Steve Wilkos was charged with a DUI on Wednesday after lying about the cause
of his serious January car crash. The talk show host previously told TMZ that
the ...

## See also:

![  Getting Cocaine Delivered Is Faster Than A Pizza

](/upload/images/small/2018/05/09/getting-cocaine-delivered-is-faster-than-a-

pizza__166889_.jpg) Getting Cocaine Delivered Is Faster Than A Pizza

![  Alcohol, Tobacco Are Biggest Threats To Human Welfare, Report Finds

](/upload/images/small/2018/05/11/alcohol-tobacco-are-biggest-threats-to-

human-welfare-report-finds__738644_.jpg) Alcohol, Tobacco Are Biggest Threats
To Human Welfare, Report Finds

![  Fatal falls are on the rise for America's senior citizens

](/upload/images/small/2018/05/11/fatal-falls-are-on-the-rise-for-americas-

senior-citizens__395089_.jpg) Fatal falls are on the rise for America's senior
citizens

![  Anti-fungal Resistance a 'Serious and Immediate Threat'

](/upload/images/small/2018/05/18/anti-fungal-resistance-a-serious-and-

immediate-threat__995724_.jpg) Anti-fungal Resistance a 'Serious and Immediate
Threat'

![  From birth to old age, here's what Americans are most likely to die from

at every age ](/upload/images/small/2018/06/13/from-birth-to-old-age-heres-

what-americans-are-most-likely-to-die-from-at-every-age__603682_.jpg) From
birth to old age, here's what Americans are most likely to die from at...

![  FDA plans to ease OTC approvals for some prescription drugs

](/upload/images/small/2018/07/17/fda-plans-to-ease-otc-approvals-for-some-

prescription-drugs__254987_.jpg) FDA plans to ease OTC approvals for some
prescription drugs

![  'For Me, It's Personal.' CDC Chief Reveals Fentanyl Almost Killed His Son

](/upload/images/small/2018/07/18/for-me-its-personal-cdc-chief-reveals-

fentanyl-almost-killed-his-son__255702_.img) 'For Me, It's Personal.' CDC
Chief Reveals Fentanyl Almost Killed His Son

![  US Deaths From Drug Overdose, Suicide Surpass Diabetes

](/upload/images/small/2018/08/28/us-deaths-from-drug-overdose-suicide-

surpass-diabetes__726263_.jpg) US Deaths From Drug Overdose, Suicide Surpass
Diabetes

usr: 12

### Topical videos

Drugged driving deaths surpass drunken driving fatalities

### TOP News

![Designer reveals how you get in and out of London's rooftop infinity

pool](/upload/images/real/2019/06/10/designer-reveals-how-you-get-in-and-out-

of-london-s-rooftop-infinity-pool__756472_.jpg)

Designer reveals how you get in and out of London's rooftop infinity...

![Jane Seymour reveals secrets of her VERY youthful looks at 68 - including a

'prayer technique' to banishes bingo wings \(and insists she quit Botox after

it made her look like a 'unicorn'\)](/upload/images/small/2019/05/16/jane-

seymour-reveals-secrets-of-her-very-youthful-looks-at-68-including-a-prayer-

technique-to-banish_549690_.jpg)

Jane Seymour reveals secrets of her VERY youthful looks at 68 - including...

![Father and son have an animated 'conversation' while watching television

together](/upload/images/small/2019/06/05/father-and-son-have-an-animated-

conversation-while-watching-television-together__666259_.jpg)

Father and son have an animated 'conversation' while watching television...

![People can't figure out how to get in and out of this stunning London

infinity pool](/upload/images/small/2019/06/07/people-can-t-figure-out-how-to-

get-in-and-out-of-this-stunning-london-infinity-pool__601598_.jpg)

People can't figure out how to get in and out of this stunning London...

###

### TOP News

![Private jet flight attendant shares her flying

confessions](/upload/images/real/2019/05/15/private-jet-flight-attendant-

shares-her-flying-confessions__104962_.jpg)

Private jet flight attendant shares her flying confessions

![This Smart French Eating Habit Might Be Just What You Need to Stay

Trim](/upload/images/small/2019/06/07/this-smart-french-eating-habit-might-be-

just-what-you-need-to-stay-trim__397883_.jpg)

This Smart French Eating Habit Might Be Just What You Need to Stay...

![Five Backdoor Hacks to Win Elite Status at Hotels and

Airlines](/upload/images/small/2019/05/24/five-backdoor-hacks-to-win-elite-

status-at-hotels-and-airlines__606323_.jpg)

Five Backdoor Hacks to Win Elite Status at Hotels and...

![Mom forced to pay former employer thousands after switching jobs during

maternity leave: 'I wasn’t prepared for

it'](/upload/images/small/2019/05/15/mom-forced-to-pay-former-employer-

thousands-after-switching-jobs-during-maternity-leave-i-wasn-t-

pre_933219_.jpg)

Mom forced to pay former employer thousands after switching jobs during...

### Latest News

Tess Holliday Wants You to Know That Getting Plastic Surgery _Can_ Be Body
Positive

These Fitness Success Stories Will Inspire You to Try a New, Active Hobby

Counting Calories Helped Me Lose Weight—But Then I Developed an Eating
Disorder

Bustling Bazaars, Ancient Cities, and the Silk Road: 10 Ways to Explore
Uzbekistan

Tweezers, a Pen or a Beer? The Smallest Items You Can Check With an Airline

American Medical Association: Let minors override parents' vaccination refusal

The Best Points and Miles for Last-Minute Flights

Here's what travelers can do to stay safe in the Dominican Republic

10 Ways a Vegan Diet Can Help—or Hurt—Your Weight Loss Goals

Which running shoe is best for you?

### Similar from the Web

Health & Fit: Fatal accidents involving drugs surpasses

drugs surpasses alcohol -associated crashes : report Fatal accidents involving
drugs surpasses alcohol -associated crashes : report A nbsp(AP) A new report
published Thursday discovered that fatal vehicle crashes involving marijuana,
opioids and drug use have improved over the past.

NIH Fact Sheets - Alcohol - Related Traffic Deaths

Traffic crashes were the leading cause of alcohol - related deaths and two-
thirds of traffic deaths among persons aged 16 to 20 involved alcohol. At that
time, preventive measures consisted primarily of efforts to reduce harm from
alcohol by identifying and treating middle-aged individuals convicted of

Drunk Driving | NHTSA | The Effects of Blood Alcohol Concentration

To reduce alcohol - related fatal crashes among youth, all States have adopted
a minimum legal drinking Also see Drug -Impaired Driving. Driving a vehicle
while impaired is a dangerous crime. Our programs have consistently reduced
alcohol - related crash fatalities . We will continue until there

Overdose Death Rates | National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)

The U.S. government does not track death rates for every drug . However, the
National Center for Health Statistics at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention does collect information The CDC also has a searchable database,
called CDC Wonder. The CDC's reporting on deaths by overdose.

Effects on alcohol related fatal crashes of a community based

Main outcome measures: The ratio of fatal crashes involving a driver or
pedestrian with a blood alcohol According to national survey data, 70% of
adults who reported driving in an alcohol related traffic To assess alcohol
involvement in fatal crashes , FARS uses actual blood test results when

Drugged driving surpasses drunken driving in deadly crashes , report

Positive drug tests were more common than the presence of alcohol among the
fatally injured drivers who were tested in 2015, according to the report The
report cautions that these data do not paint the whole picture. The authors
note that only 57% of drivers who were killed in car accidents were tested

Effects of recent 0.08% legal blood alcohol limits on fatal crash

We also examined fatal crash data from the United States Department of
Transportation Fatality Analysis Reporting System. Subtracting 1 from this
ratio gives the percentage change in the proportion of alcohol involved fatal
crashes in the 0.08% law state relative to the comparison state.

Drugs Involved in More Fatal Crashes Than Alcohol

In 2015, drugs were detected in 43 percent of drivers who suffered fatal
injuries, a higher percentage than cases involving alcohol alone, the report
found. The new report recommends more training to help police identify and
arrest drugged drivers. Responsibility.org is offering grants this year to
five

Fatal Drug - Related Crashes Outpacing Deadly Accidents Involving

According to a new report in 2016, alcohol was involved in 38 percent of
driver deaths, while 44 percent of drivers killed tested positive for drugs ,
which is a jump PHILADELPHIA (CBS) — There’s a disturbing new trend with fatal
\- drug related crashes now outpacing deadly accidents involving

Drugged driving passes alcohol alone in fatal crashes , study finds

The report by the Governors Highway Safety Association and the Foundation for
Advancing Alcohol Responsibility, a nonprofit funded by alcohol distillers,
found drugs of all types — illegal and prescription — were present in 43
Related : Marijuana Use Doubles in U.S., But So Do Problems.

  * ![](/upload/images/small/2019/03/21/here-s-why-gypsy-rose-blanchard-needed-to-get-all-of-her-teeth-extracted__22269_.jpg)
  * ![](/upload/images/small/2019/05/10/family-grieves-mom-of-4-who-died-in-childbirth-while-baby-clings-to-life__221631_.jpg)
  * ![](/upload/images/small/2019/05/16/jane-seymour-reveals-secrets-of-her-very-youthful-looks-at-68-including-a-prayer-technique-to-banish_549690_.jpg)
  * ![](/upload/images/small/2019/04/27/the-black-widow-workout-how-scarlett-johansson-got-strong-and-lean-for-avengers-endgame__199094_.jpg)
  * ![](/upload/images/small/2019/05/02/burger-king-debuts-unhappy-meals-because-no-one-is-happy-all-the-time__773195_.jpg)
  * ![](/upload/images/small/2019/05/02/the-real-life-diet-of-patrick-vellner-the-second-fittest-person-on-earth__659386_.jpg)
  * ![](/upload/images/small/2019/04/12/dana-linn-bailey-was-in-the-hospital-for-rhabdo-following-an-intense-crossfit-workout__341348_.jpg)
  * ![](/upload/images/small/2019/03/21/the-bold-type-s-meghann-fahy-wakes-up-at-4-15-a-m-for-this-reason__556903_.jpg)

  * ![](/upload/images/real/2019/03/21/here-s-why-gypsy-rose-blanchard-needed-to-get-all-of-her-teeth-extracted__22269_.jpg)

## Here’s Why Gypsy Rose Blanchard Needed To Get All Of Her Teeth...

Thursday, 21 march 2019

Apparently they were like “swiss […]

  * ![](/img/default_news.jpg)

## Family grieves mom of 4 who died in childbirth while baby clings to...

Friday, 10 may 2019

'Every time I look at Matthew, I see Lauren. In the middle of devastation,
there is […]

  * ![](/img/default_news.jpg)

## Jane Seymour reveals secrets of her VERY youthful looks at 68 - including

a 'prayer technique' to...

Thursday, 16 may 2019

The actress also has great advice for banishing "bingo […]

  * ![](/img/default_news.jpg)

## The Black Widow Workout: How Scarlett Johansson Got Strong and Lean For

Avengers:...

Saturday, 27 april 2019

Here's what the 34-year-old star did to get in her best Black Widow […]

  * ![](/img/default_news.jpg)

## Burger King debuts unhappy meals because 'no one is happy all the...

Thursday, 02 may 2019

Burger King is using its playful rivalry with McDonald's to deliver an
important message about mental […]

  * ![](/img/default_news.jpg)

## The Real-Life Diet of Patrick Vellner, the Second-Fittest Person on...

Thursday, 02 may 2019

The CrossFit star sticks to carb- and protein-heavy meals. And Sour Patch […]

  * ![](/img/default_news.jpg)

## Dana Linn Bailey Was In the Hospital for Rhabdo Following an Intense

CrossFit...

Friday, 12 april 2019

The bodybuilder shared that she experienced liver failure after doing an
advanced version of […]

  * ![](/img/default_news.jpg)

## ‘The Bold Type’s’ Meghann Fahy Wakes Up At 4:15 A.M. For This...

Thursday, 21 march 2019

Hint: It involves hot […]

![](/upload/images/small/2019/03/21/here-s-why-gypsy-rose-blanchard-needed-to-

get-all-of-her-teeth-extracted__22269_.jpg)

#### Here’s Why Gypsy Rose Blanchard Needed To Get All Of Her Teeth...

> ![](/upload/images/small/2019/05/10/family-grieves-mom-of-4-who-died-in-

childbirth-while-baby-clings-to-life__221631_.jpg)

#### Family grieves mom of 4 who died in childbirth while baby clings to...

![](/upload/images/small/2019/05/16/jane-seymour-reveals-secrets-of-her-very-

youthful-looks-at-68-including-a-prayer-technique-to-banish_549690_.jpg)

#### Jane Seymour reveals secrets of her VERY youthful looks at 68 -

including a 'prayer technique' to...

> ![](/upload/images/small/2019/04/27/the-black-widow-workout-how-scarlett-

johansson-got-strong-and-lean-for-avengers-endgame__199094_.jpg)

#### The Black Widow Workout: How Scarlett Johansson Got Strong and Lean For

Avengers:...

![](/upload/images/small/2019/05/02/burger-king-debuts-unhappy-meals-because-

no-one-is-happy-all-the-time__773195_.jpg)

#### Burger King debuts unhappy meals because 'no one is happy all the...

> ![](/upload/images/small/2019/05/02/the-real-life-diet-of-patrick-vellner-
the-

second-fittest-person-on-earth__659386_.jpg)

#### The Real-Life Diet of Patrick Vellner, the Second-Fittest Person on...

![](/upload/images/small/2019/04/12/dana-linn-bailey-was-in-the-hospital-for-

rhabdo-following-an-intense-crossfit-workout__341348_.jpg)

#### Dana Linn Bailey Was In the Hospital for Rhabdo Following an Intense

CrossFit...

> ![](/upload/images/small/2019/03/21/the-bold-type-s-meghann-fahy-wakes-up-

at-4-15-a-m-for-this-reason__556903_.jpg)

#### ‘The Bold Type’s’ Meghann Fahy Wakes Up At 4:15 A.M. For This...

News

US World Politics Crime Opinion Technology Offbeat Entertainment Sport

LifeStyle

Style Home & Garden Smart Living Family & Relationships Health & Fit Food
Travel

Autos

News Reviews buying Enthusiasts Auto Shows Motorcycles Classics Ownership

Contacts  
E-mail:

(C) 2016 PressFrom - US. All Rights Reserved.

This is interesting!

![](/upload/images/real/2018/05/09/getting-cocaine-delivered-is-faster-than-a-

pizza__166889_.jpg) Getting Cocaine Delivered Is Faster Than A Pizza

![](/upload/images/real/2018/05/11/alcohol-tobacco-are-biggest-threats-to-

human-welfare-report-finds__738644_.jpg) Alcohol, Tobacco Are Biggest Threats
To Human Welfare, Report Finds

![](/upload/images/real/2018/05/11/fatal-falls-are-on-the-rise-for-americas-

senior-citizens__395089_.jpg) Fatal falls are on the rise for America's senior
citizens

_[v]: View this template_ [t]: Discuss this template _[e]: Edit this template_
[AU]: Australia _[CA]: Canada_ [UK]: United Kingdom _[US]: United States_
[UN]: United Nations _[EU]: European Union_ [ v]: View this template _[AAAD]:
Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase_ [ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase _[ ALDH]:
Aldehyde dehydrogenase_ [ALR]: Aldehyde reductase _[PAH]: Phenylalanine
hydroxylase_ [ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase _[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase_
[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase _[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl
transferase_ [TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase _[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl
transferase_ [ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase _[ HDC]: Histidine
decarboxylase_ [ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase _[ DAO]: Diamine
oxidase_ [nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors _[PAMs]: positive
allosteric modulators_ [NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators _[TRP]:
Transient receptor potential_ [TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin
channel _[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel_ [TRPM]:
Transient receptor potential melastatin channel _[TRPML]: Transient receptor
potential mucolipin channel_ [TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin
channel _[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel_ [CBR]:
Cannabinoid receptor _[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid_ [GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric
acid A _[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid_ [GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid _[ hTAAR]:
human trace amine-associated receptor_ [ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor _[
PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor_ [ GH]: Growth hormone
_[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1_ [GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing
hormone _[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor_ [ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor
beta _[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential_ [c.]: circa

  *[v]: View this template
  *[t]: Discuss this template
  *[e]: Edit this template
  *[AU]: Australia
  *[CA]: Canada
  *[UK]: United Kingdom
  *[US]: United States
  *[UN]: United Nations
  *[EU]: European Union
  *[ v]: View this template
  *[AAAD]: Aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
  *[ MAO]: Monoamine oxidase
  *[ ALDH]: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
  *[ALR]: Aldehyde reductase
  *[PAH]: Phenylalanine hydroxylase
  *[ TH]: Tyrosine hydroxylase
  *[ DBH]: Dopamine beta-monooxygenase
  *[ PNMT]: Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ COMT]: Catechol-O-methyl transferase
  *[TPH]: Tryptophan hydroxylase
  *[ AANAT]: Serotonin N-acetyl transferase
  *[ ASMT]: Acetylserotonin O-methyltransferase
  *[ HDC]: Histidine decarboxylase
  *[ HNMT]: Histamine N-methyltransferase
  *[ DAO]: Diamine oxidase
  *[nAChRs]: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors
  *[PAMs]: positive allosteric modulators
  *[NAMs]: negative allosteric modulators
  *[TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[TRPA]: Transient receptor potential ankyrin channel
  *[TRPC]: Transient receptor potential canonical channel
  *[TRPM]: Transient receptor potential melastatin channel
  *[TRPML]: Transient receptor potential mucolipin channel
  *[TRPP]: Transient receptor potential polycystin channel
  *[TRPV]: Transient receptor potential vanilloid channel
  *[CBR]: Cannabinoid receptor
  *[ GABA]: -Aminobutyric acid
  *[GABAA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid A
  *[GABA]: γ-Aminobutyric acid
  *[GHB]: γ-Hydroxybutyric acid
  *[ hTAAR]: human trace amine-associated receptor
  *[ PAF]: Platelet-activating factor
  *[ PPAR]: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
  *[ GH]: Growth hormone
  *[IGF-1]: Insulin-like growth factor 1
  *[GnRH]: gonadotropin hormone-releasing hormone
  *[ TNF]: Tumor necrosis factor
  *[ TGFβ]: Transforming growth factor beta
  *[ TRP]: Transient receptor potential
  *[c.]: circa

